So the publication of this omnibus edition seemed like a good opportunity to set the record straight - or at least firmly crooked.
Anything that is put down wrong here is, as far as I'm concerned, wrong for good.
The idea for the title first cropped up while I was lying drunk in a field in Innsbruck, Austria, in 1971.
Not particularly drunk, just the sort of drunk you get when you have a couple of stiff Gossers after not having eaten for two days straight, on account of being a penniless hitchhiker.
We are talking of a mild inability to stand up.
I was traveling with a copy of the Hitch Hiker s Guide to Europe by Ken Walsh, a very battered copy that I had borrowed from someone.
In fact, since this was 1971 and I still have the book, it must count as stolen by now.
Night was beginning to fall on my field as it spun lazily underneath me.
I was wondering where I could go that was cheaper than Innsbruck, revolved less and didn't do the sort of things to me that Innsbruck had done to me that afternoon.
What had happened was this.
I had been walking through the town trying to find a particular address, and being thoroughly lost I stopped to ask for directions from a man in the street.
I knew this mightn't be easy because I don't speak German, but I was still surprised to discover just how much difficulty I was having communicating with this particular man.
Gradually the truth dawned on me as we struggled in vain to understand each other that of all the people in Innsbruck I could have stopped to ask, the one I had picked did not speak English, did not speak French and was also deaf and dumb.
With a series of sincerely apologetic hand movements, I disentangled myself, and a few minutes later, on another street, I stopped and asked another man who also turned out to be deaf and dumb, which was when I bought the beers.
I ventured back onto the street.
I tried again.
When the third man I spoke to turned out to be deaf and dumb and also blind I began to feel a terrible weight settling on my shoulders; wherever I looked the trees and buildings took on dark and menacing aspects.
I pulled my coat tightly around me and hurried lurching down the street, whipped by a sudden gusting wind.
I bumped into someone and stammered an apology, but he was deaf and dumb and unable to understand me.
The sky loured.
The pavement seemed to tip and spin.
If I hadn't happened then to duck down a side street and pass a hotel where a convention for the deaf was being held, there is every chance that my mind would have cracked completely and I would have spent the rest of my life writing the sort of books for which Kafka became famous and dribbling.
As it is I went to lie in a field, along with my Hitch Hiker's Guide to Europe, and when the stars came out it occurred to me that if only someone would write a Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy as well, then I for one would be off like a shot.
Having had this thought I promptly fell asleep and forgot about it for six years.
I went to Cambridge University.
I took a number of baths-and a degree in English.
I worried a lot about girls and what had happened to my bike.
Later I became a writer and worked on a lot of things that were almost incredibly successful but in fact just failed to see the light of day.
Other writers will know what I mean.
My pet project was to write something that would combine comedy and science fiction, and it was this obsession that drove me into deep debt and despair.
No one was interested, except finally one man a BBC radio producer named Simon Brett who had had the same idea, comedy and science fiction.
He was succeeded by the legendary Geoffrey Perkins.
In its original form the show was going to be rather different.
I was feeling a little disgruntled with the world at the time and had put together about six different plots, each of which ended with the destruction of the world in a different way, and for a different reason.
So I had to work out who he was and what he was doing on the Earth.
I decided to call him Ford Prefect.
He had simply mistaken the dominant life form.
So how would such a mistake arise?
I remembered when I used to hitchhike through Europe and would often find that the information or advice that came my way was out of date or misleading in some way.
Most of it, of course, just came from stories of other people's travel experiences.
At that point the title The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy suddenly popped back into my mind from wherever it had been hiding all this time.
Ford, I decided, would be a researcher who collected data for the Guide.
As soon as I started to develop this particular notion, it moved inexorably to the center of the story, and the rest, as the creator of the original Ford Prefect would say, is bunk.
The story grew in the most convoluted way, as many people will be surprised to learn.
Writing episodically meant that when I finished one episode I had no idea about what the next one would contain.
When, in the twists and turns of the plot, some event suddenly seemed to illuminate things that had gone before, I was as surprised as anyone else.
I think that the BBC's attitude toward the show while it was in production was very similar to that which Macbeth had toward murdering people - initial doubts, followed by cautious enthusiasm and then greater and greater alarm at the sheer scale of the undertaking and still no end in sight.
The budget of the series escalated to the point that it could have practically paid for a few seconds of Dallas.
If the show hadn't worked...
The first episode went out on BBC Radio 4 at 10 30 P.M. on Wednesday, March 8, 1978, in a huge blaze of no publicity at all.
Bats heard it.
The odd dog barked.
After a couple of weeks a letter or two trickled in.
So - someone out there had listened.
People I Balked to seemed to like Marvin the Paranoid Android, whom I had written in as a one - scene joke and had only developed further at Geoffrey's insistence.
Then some publishers became interested, and I was commissioned by Pan Books in England to write up the series in book form.
After a lot of procrastination and hiding and inventing excuses and having baths, I managed to get about two-thirds of it done.
At this point they said, very pleasantly and politely, that I had already passed ten deadlines, so would I please just finish the page I was on and let them have the damn thing.
So that was more or less the situation when the book The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy was published in England in September 1979 and appeared on the Sunday Times mass market best-seller list at number one and just stayed there.
Clearly, somebody had been listening.
This is where things start getting complicated, and this is what I was asked, in writing this Introduction, to explain.
The Guide has appeared in so many forms - books, radio, a television series, records and soon to be a major motion picture - each time with a different story line that even its most acute followers have become baffled at times.
Here then is a breakdown of the different versions - not including the various stage versions, which haven't been seen in the States and only complicate the matter further.
The radio series began in England in March 1978.
Fits 1 thru 6.
Easy.
Later that year, one more episode was recorded and broadcast, commonly known as the Christmas episode.
It contained no reference of any kind to Christmas.
It was called the Christmas episode because it was first broadcast on December 24, which is not Christmas Day.
After this, things began to get increasingly complicated.
In the fall of 1979, the first Hitchhiker book was published in England, called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
It was a substantially expanded version of the first four episodes of the radio series, in which some of the characters behaved in entirely different ways and others behaved in exactly the same ways but for entirely different reasons, which amounts to the same thing but saves rewriting the dialogue.
At roughly the same time a double record album was released, which was, by contrast, a slightly contracted version of the first four episodes of the radio series.
These were not the recordings that were originally broadcast but wholly new recordings of substantially the same scripts.
This was done because we had used music off gramophone records as incidental music for the series, which is fine on radio, but makes commercial release impossible.
In the fall of 1980, the second Hitchhiker book was published in England, around the same time that Harmony Books published the first book in the United States.
At roughly the same time, a second record album was made featuring a heavily rewritten and expanded version of episodes 5 and 6 of the radio series.
This record album was also called The Restaurant at the End of the Universe.
This was based, more or less, on the first six episodes of the radio series.
In other words, it incorporated most of the book The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and the second half of the book The Restaurant at be End of the Universe.
Therefore, though it followed the basic structure of the radio series, it incorporated revisions from the books, which didn't.
In January 1982 Harmony Books published The Restaurant at the End of the Universe in the United States.
In the summer of 1982, a third Hitchhiker book was published simultaneously in England and the United States, called Life, the Universe and Everything.
This was not based on anything that had already been heard or seen on radio or television.
In fact it flatly contradicted episodes 7, 8, 9,10, I 1 and 12 of the radio series.
This was published in Britain and the USA in the fall of 1984 and it effectively contradicted everything to date, up to and including itself.
Now this was an interesting venture.
The book is, as the title suggests, a collection of all the radio scripts, as broadcast, and it is therefore the only example of one Hitchhiker publication accurately and consistently reflecting another.
I feel a little uncomfortable with this - which is why the introduction to that book was written after the final and definitive one you are now reading and, of course, flatly contradicts it.
People often ask me how they can leave the planet, so I have prepared some brief notes.
How to Leave the Planet 1.
Phone NASA.
Explain that it's very important that you get away as soon as possible.
2.
3.
4.
If that also fails, phone the Pope for guidance.
His telephone number is 011-39-6-6982, and I gather his switchboard is infallible.
5.
If all these attempts fail, flag down a passing flying saucer and explain that de's vitally important you get away before your phone bill arrives.
Douglas Adams Los Angeles 1983 and London 1985/1986 DOUGLAS ADAMS THE HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY For Jonny Brock and Clare Gorst and all other Arlingtonians for tea, sympathy, and a sofa Preface Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the western spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun.
Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly insignificant little blue green planet whose ape-descended life forms are so amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.
This planet has - or rather had - a problem, which was this: most of the people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time.
Many solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.
And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.
Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place.
And some said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the world could be made a good and happy place.
This time it was right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, a terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost forever.
This is not her story.
But it is the story of that terrible stupid catastrophe and some of its consequences.
It is also the story of a book, a book called The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy - not an Earth book, never published on Earth, and until the terrible catastrophe occurred, never seen or heard of by any Earthman.
Nevertheless, a wholly remarkable book.
In fact it was probably the most remarkable book ever to come out of the great publishing houses of Ursa Minor - of which no Earthman had ever heard either.
Not only is it a wholly remarkable book, it is also a highly successful one - more popular than the Celestial Home Care Omnibus, better selling than Fifty More Things to do in Zero Gravity, and more controversial than Oolon Colluphid's trilogy of philosophical blockbusters Where God Went Wrong, Some More of God's Greatest Mistakes and Who is this God Person Anyway?
In many of the more relaxed civilizations on the Outer Eastern Rim of the Galaxy, the Hitch Hiker's Guide has already supplanted the great Encyclopedia Galactica as the standard repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for though it has many omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly inaccurate, it scores over the older, more pedestrian work in two important respects.
First, it is slightly cheaper; and secondly it has the words DON'T PANIC inscribed in large friendly letters on its cover.
But the story of this terrible, stupid Thursday, the story of its extraordinary consequences, and the story of how these consequences are inextricably intertwined with this remarkable book begins very simply.
It begins with a house.
Chapter 1 The house stood on a slight rise just on the edge of the village.
It stood on its own and looked over a broad spread of West Country farmland.
Not a remarkable house by any means - it was about thirty years old, squattish, squarish, made of brick, and had four windows set in the front of a size and proportion which more or less exactly failed to please the eye.
The only person for whom the house was in any way special was Arthur Dent, and that was only because it happened to be the one he lived in.
He had lived in it for about three years, ever since he had moved out of London because it made him nervous and irritable.
He was about thirty as well, dark haired and never quite at ease with himself.
The thing that used to worry him most was the fact that people always used to ask him what he was looking so worried about.
He worked in local radio which he always used to tell his friends was a lot more interesting than they probably thought.
It was, too - most of his friends worked in advertising.
It hadn't properly registered with Arthur that the council wanted to knock down his house and build an bypass instead.
At eight o'clock on Thursday morning Arthur didn't feel very good.
He woke up blearily, got up, wandered blearily round his room, opened a window, saw a bulldozer, found his slippers, and stomped off to the bathroom to wash.
Toothpaste on the brush - so.
Scrub.
Shaving mirror - pointing at the ceiling.
He adjusted it.
For a moment it reflected a second bulldozer through the bathroom window.
Properly adjusted, it reflected Arthur Dent's bristles.
He shaved them off, washed, dried, and stomped off to the kitchen to find something pleasant to put in his mouth.
Kettle, plug, fridge, milk, coffee.
Yawn.
The word bulldozer wandered through his mind for a moment in search of something to connect with.
The bulldozer outside the kitchen window was quite a big one.
He stared at it.
Passing the bathroom he stopped to drink a large glass of water, and another.
He began to suspect that he was hung over.
Why was he hung over?
Had he been drinking the night before?
He supposed that he must have been.
He caught a glint in the shaving mirror.
He stood and thought.
The pub, he thought.
Oh dear, the pub.
He vaguely remembered being angry, angry about something that seemed important.
He'd been telling people about it, telling people about it at great length, he rather suspected: his clearest visual recollection was of glazed looks on other people's faces.
Something about a new bypass he had just found out about.
It had been in the pipeline for months only no one seemed to have known about it.
Ridiculous.
He took a swig of water.
It would sort itself out, he'd decided, no one wanted a bypass, the council didn't have a leg to stand on.
It would sort itself out.
God what a terrible hangover it had earned him though.
He looked at himself in the wardrobe mirror.
He stuck out his tongue.
The word yellow wandered through his mind in search of something to connect with.
Fifteen seconds later he was out of the house and lying in front of a big yellow bulldozer that was advancing up his garden path.
Mr. L Prosser was, as they say, only human.
In other words he was a carbon-based life form descended from an ape.
More specifically he was forty, fat and shabby and worked for the local council.
Curiously enough, though he didn't know it, he was also a direct male-line descendant of Genghis Khan, though intervening generations and racial mixing had so juggled his genes that he had no discernible Mongoloid characteristics, and the only vestiges left in Mr. L Prosser of his mighty ancestry were a pronounced stoutness about the turn and a predilection for little fur hats.
He was by no means a great warrior: in fact he was a nervous worried man.
Today he was particularly nervous and worried because something had gone seriously wrong with his job - which was to see that Arthur Dent's house got cleared out of the way before the day was out.
He tried to make his eyes blaze fiercely but they just wouldn't do it.
Arthur lay in the mud and squelched at him.
Mr. Prosser shook his finger at him for a bit, then stopped and put it away again.
Bypasses are devices which allow some people to drive from point A to point B very fast whilst other people dash from point B to point A very fast.
People living at point C, being a point directly in between, are often given to wonder what's so great about point A that so many people of point B are so keen to get there, and what's so great about point B that so many people of point A are so keen to get there.
They often wish that people would just once and for all work out where the hell they wanted to be.
Mr. Prosser wanted to be at point D. Point D wasn't anywhere in particular, it was just any convenient point a very long way from points A, B and C. He would have a nice little cottage at point D, with axes over the door, and spend a pleasant amount of time at point E, which would be the nearest pub to point D. His wife of course wanted climbing roses, but he wanted axes.
He didn't know why - he just liked axes.
He flushed hotly under the derisive grins of the bulldozer drivers.
He shifted his weight from foot to foot, but it was equally uncomfortable on each.
Obviously somebody had been appallingly incompetent and he hoped to God it wasn't him.
The first I knew about it was when a workman arrived at my home yesterday.
I asked him if he'd come to clean the windows and he said no he'd come to demolish the house.
He didn't tell me straight away of course.
Oh no.
First he wiped a couple of windows and charged me a fiver.
You hadn't exactly gone out of your way to call attention to them had you?
A cloud passed overhead.
It cast a shadow over Arthur Dent as he lay propped up on his elbow in the cold mud.
It cast a shadow over Arthur Dent's house.
Mr. Prosser frowned at it.
Mr. Prosser's mouth opened and closed a couple of times while his mind was for a moment filled with inexplicable but terribly attractive visions of Arthur Dent's house being consumed with fire and Arthur himself running screaming from the blazing ruin with at least three hefty spears protruding from his back.
Mr. Prosser was often bothered with visions like these and they made him feel very nervous.
He stuttered for a moment and then pulled himself together.
By a curious coincidence, None at all is exactly how much suspicion the ape-descendant Arthur Dent had that one of his closest friends was not descended from an ape, but was in fact from a small planet in the vicinity of Betelgeuse and not from Guildford as he usually claimed.
Arthur Dent had never, ever suspected this.
This friend of his had first arrived on the planet some fifteen Earth years previously, and he had worked hard to blend himself into Earth society - with, it must be said, some success.
For instance he had spent those fifteen years pretending to be an out of work actor, which was plausible enough.
He had made one careless blunder though, because he had skimped a bit on his preparatory research.
He was not conspicuously tall, his features were striking but not conspicuously handsome.
His hair was wiry and gingerish and brushed backwards from the temples.
His skin seemed to be pulled backwards from the nose.
There was something very slightly odd about him, but it was difficult to say what it was.
Perhaps it was that his eyes didn't blink often enough and when you talked to him for any length of time your eyes began involuntarily to water on his behalf.
Perhaps it was that he smiled slightly too broadly and gave people the unnerving impression that he was about to go for their neck.
He struck most of the friends he had made on Earth as an eccentric, but a harmless one - an unruly boozer with some oddish habits.
For instance he would often gatecrash university parties, get badly drunk and start making fun of any astrophysicist he could find till he got thrown out.
Sometimes he would get seized with oddly distracted moods and stare into the sky as if hypnotized until someone asked him what he was doing.
Then he would start guiltily for a moment, relax and grin.
Evenings like this usually ended badly.
Ford would get out of his skull on whisky, huddle into a corner with some girl and explain to her in slurred phrases that honestly the colour of the flying saucers didn't matter that much really.
Thereafter, staggering semi-paralytic down the night streets he would often ask passing policemen if they knew the way to Betelgeuse.
In fact what he was really looking out for when he stared distractedly into the night sky was any kind of flying saucer at all.
The reason he said green was that green was the traditional space livery of the Betelgeuse trading scouts.
Ford Prefect was desperate that any flying saucer at all would arrive soon because fifteen years was a long time to get stranded anywhere, particularly somewhere as mindboggingly dull as the Earth.
Ford wished that a flying saucer would arrive soon because he knew how to flag flying saucers down and get lifts from them.
He knew how to see the Marvels of the Universe for less than thirty Altairan dollars a day.
In fact.
Ford Prefect was a roving researcher for that wholly remarkable book The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
Human beings are great adaptors, and by lunchtime life in the environs of Arthur's house had settled into a steady routine.
The Earth moved slowly in its diurnal course.
The sun was beginning to dry out the mud Arthur lay in.
A shadow moved across him again.
Arthur looked up and squinting into the sun was startled to see Ford Prefect standing above him.
They don't have sarcasm on Betelgeuse, and Ford Prefect often failed to notice it unless he was concentrating.
For a few seconds Ford seemed to ignore him, and stared fixedly into the sky like a rabbit trying to get run over by a car.
Then suddenly he squatted down beside Arthur.
Now.
He looked into the sky again, nervous, expectant.
He pointed at Prosser.
Ford glanced at him, puzzled.
Nothing's the matter.
Listen to me - I've got to tell you the most important thing you've ever heard.
Ford stared at Arthur, and Arthur was astonished to find that his will was beginning to weaken.
He didn't realize that this was because of an old drinking game that Ford learned to play in the hyperspace ports that served the madranite mining belts in the star system of Orion Beta.
The game was not unlike the Earth game called Indian Wrestling, and was played like this: Two contestants would sit either side of a table, with a glass in front of each of them.
Each of the two contestants would then concentrate their will on the bottle and attempt to tip it and pour spirit into the glass of his opponent - who would then have to drink it.
The bottle would then be refilled.
The game would be played again.
And again.
Once you started to lose you would probably keep losing, because one of the effects of Janx spirit is to depress telepsychic power.
As soon as a predetermined quantity had been consumed, the final loser would have to perform a forfeit, which was usually obscenely biological.
Ford Prefect usually played to lose.
Ford stared at Arthur, who began to think that perhaps he did want to go to the Florse and Groom after all.
Ford looked across to Mr. Prosser, and suddenly a wicked thought struck him.
Fie was surprised and slightly alarmed to find that Arthur had company.
Mr. Prosser thought about this.
Prosser was worried.
He thought that one of them wasn't making a lot of sense.
Mr. Prosser thought it sounded perfectly potty.
He frowned, then smiled, then tried to do both at once, failed, grasped hold of his fur hat and rolled it fitfully round the top of his head.
He could only assume that he had just won.
Somebody's got to lie in front of the bulldozers haven't they?
As soon as Mr. Prosser realized that he was substantially the loser after all, it was as if a weight lifted itself off his shoulders: this was more like the world as he knew it.
He sighed.
Mr. Prosser took a few nervous steps forward and stopped.
He turned to Arthur.
Arthur stood up, feeling as if he was in a dream.
Ford beckoned to Prosser who sadly, awkwardly, sat down in the mud.
He felt that his whole life was some kind of dream and he sometimes wondered whose it was and whether they were enjoying it.
The mud folded itself round his bottom and his arms and oozed into his shoes.
Ford looked at him severely.
He saw the bulldozer driver's union representative approaching and let his head sink back and closed his eyes.
He was trying to marshal his arguments for proving that he did not now constitute a mental health hazard himself.
He was far from certain about this - his mind seemed to be full of noise, horses, smoke, and the stench of blood.
This always happened when he felt miserable and put upon, and he had never been able to explain it to himself.
In a high dimension of which we know nothing the mighty Khan bellowed with rage, but Mr. Prosser only trembled slightly and whimpered.
He began to fell little pricks of water behind the eyelids.
Bureaucratic cock-ups, angry men lying in the mud, indecipherable strangers handing out inexplicable humiliations and an unidentified army of horsemen laughing at him in his head - what a day.
What a day.
Ford Prefect knew that it didn't matter a pair of dingo's kidneys whether Arthur's house got knocked down or not now.
Arthur remained very worried.
Chapter 2 Here's what the Encyclopedia Galactica has to say about alcohol.
It says that alcohol is a colourless volatile liquid formed by the fermentation of sugars and also notes its intoxicating effect on certain carbon-based life forms.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy also mentions alcohol.
It says that the best drink in existence is the Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster.
It says that the effect of a Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster is like having your brains smashed out by a slice of lemon wrapped round a large gold brick.
The Guide also tells you on which planets the best Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters are mixed, how much you can expect to pay for one and what voluntary organizations exist to help you rehabilitate afterwards.
The Guide even tells you how you can mix one yourself.
Pour into it one measure of water from the seas of Santraginus V - Oh that Santraginean sea water, it says.
Allow four litres of Fallian marsh gas to bubble through it, in memory of all those happy Hikers who have died of pleasure in the Marshes of Fallia.
Over the back of a silver spoon float a measure of Qualactin Hypermint extract, redolent of all the heady odours of the dark Qualactin Zones, subtle sweet and mystic.
Drop in the tooth of an Algolian Suntiger.
Watch it dissolve, spreading the fires of the Algolian Suns deep into the heart of the drink.
Sprinkle Zamphuor.
Add an olive.
Drink... but... very carefully...
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy sells rather better than the Encyclopedia Galactica.
The barman of the Horse and Groom didn't deserve this sort of treatment, he was a dignified old man.
He pushed his glasses up his nose and blinked at Ford Prefect.
Ford ignored him and stared out of the window, so the barman looked instead at Arthur who shrugged helplessly and said nothing.
He tried again.
Ford glanced round at him.
Ford looked back at him, genuinely surprised.
He frowned.
The barman breathed in heavily.
Arthur smiled at him wanly and shrugged again.
He turned and smiled wanly at the rest of the pub just in case any of them had heard what was going on.
None of them had, and none of them could understand what he was smiling at them for.
A man sitting next to Ford at the bar looked at the two men, looked at the six pints, did a swift burst of mental arithmetic, arrived at an answer he liked and grinned a stupid hopeful grin at them.
Ford slapped a five-pound note on the bar.
The barman simply decided to walk away for a bit.
The man next to ford grinned and nodded happily.
Ford ignored him.
Arthur stared into his beer.
Arthur thought.
Arthur shrugged in a so-so sort of way.
Ford gave up.
It really wasn't worth bothering at the moment, what with the world being about to end.
Arthur gave the rest of the pub another wan smile.
The rest of the pub frowned at him.
A man waved at him to stop smiling at them and mind his own business.
Chapter 3 On this particular Thursday, something was moving quietly through the ionosphere many miles above the surface of the planet; several somethings in fact, several dozen huge yellow chunky slablike somethings, huge as office buildings, silent as birds.
They soared with ease, basking in electromagnetic rays from the star Sol, biding their time, grouping, preparing.
The planet beneath them was almost perfectly oblivious of their presence, which was just how they wanted it for the moment.
The huge yellow somethings went unnoticed at Goonhilly, they passed over Cape Canaveral without a blip, Woomera and Jodrell Bank looked straight through them - which was a pity because it was exactly the sort of thing they'd been looking for all these years.
The only place they registered at all was on a small black device called a Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic which winked away quietly to itself.
It nestled in the darkness inside a leather satchel which Ford Prefect wore habitually round his neck.
The contents of Ford Prefect's satchel were quite interesting in fact and would have made any Earth physicist's eyes pop out of his head, which is why he always concealed them by keeping a couple of dog-eared scripts for plays he pretended he was auditioning for stuffed in the top.
Besides the Sub-Etha Sens- O-Matic and the scripts he had an Electronic Thumb - a short squat black rod, smooth and matt with a couple of flat switches and dials at one end; he also had a device which looked rather like a largish electronic calculator.
It looked insanely complicated, and this was one of the reasons why the snug plastic cover it fitted into had the words Don't Panic printed on it in large friendly letters.
The other reason was that this device was in fact that most remarkable of all books ever to come out of the great publishing corporations of Ursa Minor - The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
The reason why it was published in the form of a micro sub meson electronic component is that if it were printed in normal book form, an interstellar hitch hiker would require several inconveniently large buildings to carry it around in.
Beneath that in Ford Prefect's satchel were a few biros, a notepad, and a largish bath towel from Marks and Spencer.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has a few things to say on the subject of towels.
A towel, it says, is about the most massively useful thing an interstellar hitch hiker can have.
More importantly, a towel has immense psychological value.
Nestling quietly on top of the towel in Ford Prefect's satchel, the Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic began to wink more quickly.
Miles above the surface of the planet the huge yellow somethings began to fan out.
At Jodrell Bank, someone decided it was time for a nice relaxing cup of tea.
Arthur, struggling through his third pint, looked round at him.
Fie had given up being surprised, there didn't seem to be any point any longer.
Ford clicked his tongue in irritation.
At that moment the dull sound of a rumbling crash from outside filtered through the low murmur of the pub, through the sound of the jukebox, through the sound of the man next to Ford hiccupping over the whisky Ford had eventually bought him.
Arthur choked on his beer, leapt to his feet.
Suddenly Ford's spell was broken.
Arthur looked wildly around him and ran to the window.
They're knocking my house down.
Fie quickly checked out of the window again that they were talking about the same thing.
Fie made no friends at all in the pub that lunchtime.
Ford would have to go after him.
Turning quickly to the barman he asked for four packets of peanuts.
Ford was very kind - he gave the barman another five-pound note and told him to keep the change.
The barman looked at it and then looked at Ford.
Fie suddenly shivered: he experienced a momentary sensation that he didn't understand because no one on Earth had ever experienced it before.
In moments of great stress, every life form that exists gives out a tiny sublimal signal.
This signal simply communicates an exact and almost pathetic sense of how far that being is from the place of his birth.
On Earth it is never possible to be further than sixteen thousand miles from your birthplace, which really isn't very far, so such signals are too minute to be noticed.
Ford Prefect was at this moment under great stress, and he was born 600 light years away in the near vicinity of Betelgeuse.
The barman reeled for a moment, hit by a shocking, incomprehensible sense of distance.
Fie didn't know what it meant, but he looked at Ford Prefect with a new sense of respect, almost awe.
Ford had recovered himself.
Fie was at his flippest.
The barman couldn't believe the conversation he was having, but he couldn't believe the sensation he had just had either.
Someone in the hushed bar suddenly laughed raucously at how stupid everyone had become.
The man sitting next to Ford was a bit sozzled by now.
Flis eyes waved their way up to Ford.
With a wave, he left.
The pub was silent for a moment longer, and then, embarrassingly enough, the man with the raucous laugh did it again.
The girl he had dragged along to the pub with him had grown to loathe him dearly over the last hour or so, and it would probably have been a great satisfaction to her to know that in a minute and a half or so he would suddenly evaporate into a whiff of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide.
Flowever, when the moment came she would be too busy evaporating herself to notice it.
The barman cleared his throat.
The huge yellow machines began to sink downward and to move faster.
Ford knew they were there.
This wasn't the way he had wanted it.
Running up the lane, Arthur had nearly reached his house.
Fie didn't notice how cold it had suddenly become, he didn't notice the wind, he didn't notice the sudden irrational squall of rain.
Fie didn't notice anything but the caterpillar bulldozers crawling over the rubble that had been his home.
I'll have you hung, drawn and quartered!
And whipped!
Ford was running after him very fast.
Very very fast.
Arthur didn't notice that the men were running from the bulldozers; he didn't notice that Mr. Prosser was staring hectically into the sky.
What Mr. Prosser had noticed was that huge yellow somethings were screaming through the clouds.
Impossibly huge yellow somethings.
Arthur tripped, and fell headlong, rolled and landed flat on his back.
At last he noticed that something was going on.
His finger shot upwards.
Whatever it was raced across the sky in monstrous yellowness, tore the sky apart with mind-buggering noise and leapt off into the distance leaving the gaping air to shut behind it with a bang that drove your ears six feet into your skull.
Another one followed and did the same thing only louder.
It's difficult to say exactly what the people on the surface of the planet were doing now, because they didn't really know what they were doing themselves.
None of it made a lot of sense - running into houses, running out of houses, howling noiselessly at the noise.
All around the world city streets exploded with people, cars slewed into each other as the noise fell on them and then rolled off like a tidal wave over hills and valleys, deserts and oceans, seeming to flatten everything it hit.
Only one man stood and watched the sky, stood with terrible sadness in his eyes and rubber bungs in his ears.
He knew exactly what was happening and had known ever since his Sub-Etha Sens-O- Matic had started winking in the dead of night beside his pillar and woken him with a start.
It was what he had waited for all these years, but when he had deciphered the signal pattern sitting alone in his small dark room a coldness had gripped him and squeezed his heart.
Of all the races in all of the Galaxy who could have come and said a big hello to planet Earth, he thought, didn't it just have to be the Vogons.
Still he knew what he had to do.
As the Vogon craft screamed through the air high above him he opened his satchel.
He threw away a copy of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, he threw away a copy of Godspell: He wouldn't need them where he was going.
Everything was ready, everything was prepared.
He knew where his towel was.
A sudden silence hit the Earth.
If anything it was worse than the noise.
For a while nothing happened.
The great ships hung motionless in the air, over every nation on Earth.
Motionless they hung, huge, heavy, steady in the sky, a blasphemy against nature.
Many people went straight into shock as their minds tried to encompass what they were looking at.
The ships hung in the sky in much the same way that bricks don't.
And still nothing happened.
Then there was a slight whisper, a sudden spacious whisper of open ambient sound.
Every hi-fi set in the world, every radio, every television, every cassette recorder, every woofer, every tweeter, every mid-range driver in the world quietly turned itself on.
Every tin can, every dust bin, every window, every car, every wine glass, every sheet of rusty metal became activated as an acoustically perfect sounding board.
Before the Earth passed away it was going to be treated to the very ultimate in sound reproduction, the greatest public address system ever built.
But there was no concert, no music, no fanfare, just a simple message.
Wonderful perfect quadrophonic sound with distortion levels so low as to make a brave man weep.
The process will take slightly less that two of your Earth minutes.
The PA died away.
Uncomprehending terror settled on the watching people of Earth.
The terror moved slowly through the gathered crowds as if they were iron fillings on a sheet of board and a magnet was moving beneath them.
Panic sprouted again, desperate fleeing panic, but there was nowhere to flee to.
Observing this, the Vogons turned on their PA again.
The PA fell silent again and its echo drifted off across the land.
The huge ships turned slowly in the sky with easy power.
On the underside of each a hatchway opened, an empty black space.
By this time somebody somewhere must have manned a radio transmitter, located a wavelength and broadcasted a message back to the Vogon ships, to plead on behalf of the planet.
Nobody ever heard what they said, they only heard the reply.
The PA slammed back into life again.
The voice was annoyed.
For heaven's sake mankind, it's only four light years away you know.
I'm sorry, but if you can't be bothered to take an interest in local affairs that's your own lookout.
Light poured out into the hatchways.
It cut off.
There was a terrible ghastly silence.
There was a terrible ghastly noise.
There was a terrible ghastly silence.
The Vogon Constructor fleet coasted away into the inky starry void.
Chapter 4 Far away on the opposite spiral arm of the Galaxy, five hundred thousand light years from the star Sol, Zaphod Beeblebrox, President of the Imperial Galactic Government, sped across the seas of Damogran, his ion drive delta boat winking and flashing in the Damogran sun.
Damogran the hot; Damogran the remote; Damogran the almost totally unheard of.
Damogran, secret home of the Heart of Gold.
The boat sped on across the water.
It would be some time before it reached its destination because Damogran is such an inconveniently arranged planet.
It consists of nothing but middling to large desert islands separated by very pretty but annoyingly wide stretches of ocean.
The boat sped on.
Because of this topological awkwardness Damogran has always remained a deserted planet.
This is why the Imperial Galactic Government chose Damogran for the Heart of Gold project, because it was so deserted and the Heart of Gold was so secret.
The boat zipped and skipped across the sea, the sea that lay between the main islands of the only archipelago of any useful size on the whole planet.
One of the side effects of work on the Heart of Gold was a whole string of pretty meaningless coincidences.
But it was not in any way a coincidence that today, the day of culmination of the project, the great day of unveiling, the day that the Heart of Gold was finally to be introduced to a marvelling Galaxy, was also a great day of culmination for Zaphod Beeblebrox.
It was for the sake of this day that he had first decided to run for the Presidency, a decision which had sent waves of astonishment throughout the Imperial Galaxy.
Zaphod Beeblebrox?
President?
Not the Zaphod Beeblebrox?
Not the President?
Many had seen it as a clinching proof that the whole of known creation had finally gone bananas.
Zaphod grinned and gave the boat an extra kick of speed.
President?
No one had gone bananas, not in that way at least.
Only six people in the entire Galaxy understood the principle on which the Galaxy was governed, and they knew that once Zaphod Beeblebrox had announced his intention to run as President it was more or less a fait accompli: he was the ideal Presidency fodderl.
What they completely failed to understand was why Zaphod was doing it.
He banked sharply, shooting a wild wall of water at the sun.
Today was the day; today was the day when they would realize what Zaphod had been up to.
Today was what Zaphod Beeblebrox's Presidency was all about.
Today was also his two hundredth birthday, but that was just another meaningless coincidence.
As he skipped his boat across the seas of Damogran he smiled quietly to himself about what a wonderful exciting day it was going to be.
He relaxed and spread his two arms lazily across the seat back.
He steered with an extra arm he'd recently fitted just beneath his right one to help improve his ski-boxing.
But his nerves sang a song shriller than a dog whistle.
The island of France was about twenty miles long, five miles across the middle, sandy and crescent shaped.
In fact it seemed to exist not so much as an island in its own right as simply a means of defining the sweep and curve of a huge bay.
This impression was heightened by the fact that the inner coastline of the crescent consisted almost entirely of steep cliffs.
From the top of the cliff the land sloped slowly down five miles to the opposite shore.
On top of the cliffs stood a reception committee.
All except the Hooloovoo were resplendent in their multi-colored ceremonial lab coats; the Hooloovoo had been temporarily refracted into a free standing prism for the occasion.
There was a mood of immense excitement thrilling through all of them.
Together and between them they had gone to and beyond the furthest limits of physical laws, restructured the fundamental fabric of matter, strained, twisted and broken the laws of possibility and impossibility, but still the greatest excitement of all seemed to be to meet a man with an orange sash round his neck.
It might not even have made much difference to them if they'd known exactly how much power the President of the Galaxy actually wielded: none at all.
Only six people in the Galaxy knew that the job of the Galactic President was not to wield power but to attract attention away from it.
Zaphod Beeblebrox was amazingly good at his job.
The crowd gasped, dazzled by sun and seemanship, as the Presidential speedboat zipped round the headland into the bay.
It flashed and shone as it came skating over the sea in wide skidding turns.
In fact it didn't need to touch the water at all, because it was supported on a hazy cushion of ionized atoms - but just for effect it was fitted with thin finblades which could be lowered into the water.
They slashed sheets of water hissing into the air, carved deep gashes into the sea which swayed crazily and sank back foaming into the boat's wake as it careered across the bay.
Zaphod loved effect: it was what he was best at.
He twisted the wheel sharply, the boat slewed round in a wild scything skid beneath the cliff face and dropped to rest lightly on the rocking waves.
Within seconds he ran out onto the deck and waved and grinned at over three billion people.
The three billion people weren't actually there, but they watched his every gesture through the eyes of a small robot tri-D camera which hovered obsequiously in the air nearby.
The antics of the President always made amazingly popular tri-D; that's what they were for.
He grinned again.
Three billion and six people didn't know it, but today would be a bigger antic than anyone had bargained for.
The robot camera homed in for a close up on the more popular of his two heads and he waved again.
He was roughly humanoid in appearance except for the extra head and third arm.
His fair tousled hair stuck out in random directions, his blue eyes glinted with something completely unidentifiable, and his chins were almost always unshaven.
A twenty-foot-high transparent globe floated next to his boat, rolling and bobbing, glistening in the brilliant sun.
Inside it floated a wide semi-circular sofa upholstered in glorious red leather: the more the globe bobbed and rolled, the more the sofa stayed perfectly still, steady as an upholstered rock.
Again, all done for effect as much as anything.
Zaphod stepped through the wall of the globe and relaxed on the sofa.
He spread his two arms lazily along the back and with the third brushed some dust off his knee.
His heads looked about, smiling; he put his feet up.
At any moment, he thought, he might scream.
Water boiled up beneath the bubble, it seethed and spouted.
The bubble surged into the air, bobbing and rolling on the water spout.
Up, up it climbed, throwing stilts of light at the cliff.
Up it surged on the jet, the water falling from beneath it, crashing back into the sea hundreds of feet below.
Zaphod smiled, picturing himself.
A thoroughly ridiculous form of transport, but a thoroughly beautiful one.
At the top of the cliff the globe wavered for a moment, tipped on to a railed ramp, rolled down it to a small concave platform and riddled to a halt.
To tremendous applause Zaphod Beeblebrox stepped out of the bubble, his orange sash blazing in the light.
The President of the Galaxy had arrived.
He waited for the applause to die down, then raised his hands in greeting.
A government spider sidled up to him and attempted to press a copy of his prepared speech into his hands.
Pages three to seven of the original version were at the moment floating soggily on the Damogran sea some five miles out from the bay.
Pages one and two had been salvaged by a Damogran Frond Crested Eagle and had already become incorporated into an extraordinary new form of nest which the eagle had invented.
It was constructed largely of paper and it was virtually impossible for a newly hatched baby eagle to break out of it.
The Damogran Frond Crested Eagle had heard of the notion of survival of the species but wanted no truck with it.
Zaphod Beeblebrox would not be needing his set speech and he gently deflected the one being offered him by the spider.
Everyone beamed at him, or, at least, nearly everyone.
He singled out Trillian from the crowd.
Trillian was a girl that Zaphod had picked up recently whilst visiting a planet, just for fun, incognito.
She was slim, darkish, humanoid, with long waves of black hair, a full mouth, an odd little nob of a nose and ridiculously brown eyes.
With her red head scarf knotted in that particular way and her long flowing silky brown dress she looked vaguely Arabic.
Not that anyone there had ever heard of an Arab of course.
The Arabs had very recently ceased to exist, and even when they had existed they were five hundred thousand light years from Damogran.
Trillian wasn't anybody in particular, or so Zaphod claimed.
She just went around with him rather a lot and told him what she thought of him.
She flashed him a quick tight smile and looked away.
Then she looked back for a moment and smiled more warmly - but by this time he was looking at something else.
He grinned at them particularly because he knew that in a few moments he would be giving them one hell of a quote.
The next thing he said though was not a lot of use to them.
One of the officials of the party had irritably decided that the President was clearly not in a mood to read the deliciously turned speech that had been written for him, and had flipped the switch on the remote control device in his pocket.
Away in front of them a huge white dome that bulged against the sky cracked down in the middle, split, and slowly folded itself down into the ground.
Everyone gasped although they had known perfectly well it was going to do that because they had built it that way.
Beneath it lay uncovered a huge starship, one hundred and fifty metres long, shaped like a sleek running shoe, perfectly white and mindboggingly beautiful.
At the heart of it, unseen, lay a small gold box which carried within it the most brain-wretching device ever conceived, a device which made this starship unique in the history of the galaxy, a device after which the ship had been named - The Heart of Gold.
There wasn't much else he could say.
He said it again because he knew it would annoy the press.
The crowd turned their faces back towards him expectantly.
He winked at Trillian who raised her eyebrows and widened her eyes at him.
She knew what he was about to say and thought him a terrible showoff.
A marvellous Presidential quote, absolutely true to form.
The crowd laughed appreciatively, the newsmen gleefully punched buttons on their Sub-Etha News-Matics and the President grinned.
As he grinned his heart screamed unbearably and he fingered the small Paralyso-Matic bomb that nestled quietly in his pocket.
Finally he could bear it no more.
He lifted his heads up to the sky, let out a wild whoop in major thirds, threw the bomb to the ground and ran forward through the sea of suddenly frozen smiles.
Chapter 5 Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was not a pleasant sight, even for other Vogons.
His highly domed nose rose high above a small piggy forehead.
His dark green rubbery skin was thick enough for him to play the game of Vogon Civil Service politics, and play it well, and waterproof enough for him to survive indefinitely at sea depths of up to a thousand feet with no ill effects.
Not that he ever went swimming of course.
His busy schedule would not allow it.
He was the way he was because billions of years ago when the Vogons had first crawled out of the sluggish primeval seas of Vogsphere, and had lain panting and heaving on the planet's virgin shores... when the first rays of the bright young Vogsol sun had shone across them that morning, it was as if the forces of evolution had simply given up on them there and then, had turned aside in disgust and written them off as an ugly and unfortunate mistake.
They never evolved again; they should never have survived.
The fact that they did is some kind of tribute to the thick-willed slug-brained stubbornness of these creatures.
Evolution? they said to themselves, Who needs it?, and what nature refused to do for them they simply did without until such time as they were able to rectify the grosser anatomical inconveniences with surgery.
Meanwhile, the natural forces on the planet Vogsphere had been working overtime to make up for their earlier blunder.
They brought forth scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs, which the Vogons ate, smashing their shells with iron mallets; tall aspiring trees with breathtaking slenderness and colour which the Vogons cut down and burned the crab meat with; elegant gazelle-like creatures with silken coats and dewy eyes which the Vogons would catch and sit on.
They were no use as transport because their backs would snap instantly, but the Vogons sat on them anyway.
Thus the planet Vogsphere whiled away the unhappy millennia until the Vogons suddenly discovered the principles of interstellar travel.
Within a few short Vog years every last Vogon had migrated to the Megabrantis cluster, the political hub of the Galaxy and now formed the immensely powerful backbone of the Galactic Civil Service.
They have attempted to acquire learning, they have attempted to acquire style and social grace, but in most respects the modern Vogon is little different from his primitive forebears.
Every year they import twenty-seven thousand scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs from their native planet and while away a happy drunken night smashing them to bits with iron mallets.
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was a fairly typical Vogon in that he was thoroughly vile.
Also, he did not like hitchhikers.
Somewhere in a small dark cabin buried deep in the intestines of Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz's flagship, a small match flared nervously.
The owner of the match was not a Vogon, but he knew all about them and was right to be nervous.
His name was Ford Prefect2.
He looked about the cabin but could see very little; strange monstrous shadows loomed and leaped with the tiny flickering flame, but all was quiet.
He breathed a silent thank you to the Dentrassis.
The Dentrassis are an unruly tribe of gourmands, a wild but pleasant bunch whom the Vogons had recently taken to employing as catering staff on their long haul fleets, on the strict understanding that they keep themselves very much to themselves.
This suited the Dentrassis fine, because they loved Vogon money, which is one of the hardest currencies in space, but loathed the Vogons themselves.
The only sort of Vogon a Dentrassi liked to see was an annoyed Vogon.
It was because of this tiny piece of information that Ford Prefect was not now a whiff of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide.
He heard a slight groan.
By the light of the match he saw a heavy shape moving slightly on the floor.
Quickly he shook the match out, reached in his pocket, found what he was looking for and took it out.
He crouched on the floor.
The shape moved again.
Arthur Dent moved, and groaned again, muttering incoherently.
He opened his eyes.
One of the things Ford Prefect had always found hardest to understand about human beings was their habit of continually stating and repeating the obvious, as in It's a nice day, or You're very tall, or Oh dear you seem to have fallen down a thirty-foot well, are you alright?
At first Ford had formed a theory to account for this strange behaviour.
If human beings don't keep exercising their lips, he thought, their mouths probably seize up.
If they don't keep on exercising their lips, he thought, their brains start working.
After a while he abandoned this one as well as being obstructively cynical and decided he quite liked human beings after all, but he always remained desperately worried about the terrible number of things they didn't know about.
He helped Arthur to some peanuts.
Ford stared at him blankly in the darkness.
Ford stood up.
Ford struck another match to help him search for a light switch.
Monstrous shadows leaped and loomed again.
Arthur struggled to his feet and hugged himself apprehensively.
Hideous alien shapes seemed to throng about him, the air was thick with musty smells which sidled into his lungs without identifying themselves, and a low irritating hum kept his brain from focusing.
Even Ford was surprised.
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz heaved his unpleasant green body round the control bridge.
He always felt vaguely irritable after demolishing populated planets.
He wished that someone would come and tell him that it was all wrong so that he could shout at them and feel better.
He flopped as heavily as he could on to his control seat in the hope that it would break and give him something to be genuinely angry about, but it only gave a complaining sort of creak.
The guard vanished immediately, feeling rather relieved.
He was glad it wouldn't now be him who delivered the report they'd just received.
The report was an official release which said that a wonderful new form of spaceship drive was at this moment being unveiled at a government research base on Damogran which would henceforth make all hyperspatial express routes unnecessary.
Another door slid open, but this time the Vogon captain didn't shout because it was the door from the galley quarters where the Dentrassis prepared his meals.
A meal would be most welcome.
A huge furry creature bounded through the door with his lunch tray.
It was grinning like a maniac.
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was delighted.
He knew that when a Dentrassi looked that pleased with itself there was something going on somewhere on the ship that he could get very angry indeed about.
Ford and Arthur stared about them.
Ford frowned at the grubby mattress, unwashed cups and unidentifiable bits of smelly alien underwear that lay around the cramped cabin.
He sat down on one of the mattresses and rummaged about in his satchel.
Arthur prodded the mattress nervously and then sat on it himself: in fact he had very little to be nervous about, because all mattresses grown in the swamps of Squornshellous Zeta are very thoroughly killed and dried before being put to service.
Very few have ever come to life again.
Ford handed the book to Arthur.
It's a sort of electronic book.
It tells you everything you need to know about anything.
Arthur turned it over nervously in his hands.
He snatched it from Arthur who was still holding it as if it was a two-week-dead lark and pulled it out of its cover.
A screen, about three inches by four, lit up and characters began to flicker across the surface.
His fingers tapped some more keys.
The words Vogon Constructor Fleets flared in green across the screen.
Ford pressed a large red button at the bottom of the screen and words began to undulate across it.
At the same time, the book began to speak the entry as well in a still quiet measured voice.
This is what the book said.
Here is what to do if you want to get a lift from a Vogon: forget it.
They are one of the most unpleasant races in the Galaxy - not actually evil, but bad tempered, bureaucratic, officious and callous.
Arthur blinked at it.
A pained expression crossed Arthur's face.
And they'll always help hitchhikers aboard, partly because they like the company, but mostly because it annoys the Vogons.
Which is exactly the sort of thing you need to know if you're an impoverished hitch hiker trying to see the marvels of the Universe for less than thirty Altai ran Dollars a day.
And that's my job.
Arthur looked lost.
Teasers are usually rich kids with nothing to do.
Arthur began to feel that Ford was enjoying making life difficult for him.
They find some isolated spot with very few people around, then land right by some poor soul whom no one's ever going to believe and then strut up and down in front of him wearing silly antennae on their heads and making beep beep noises.
Ford leant back on the mattress with his hands behind his head and looked infuriatingly pleased with himself.
Ford frowned to himself and seemed to roll the thought around his mind.
Ford sprang up.
The Galaxy's a fun place.
Ford was holding up a small glass jar which quite clearly had a small yellow fish wriggling around in it.
Arthur blinked at him.
Fie wished there was something simple and recognizable he could grasp hold of.
Fie would have felt safe if alongside the Dentrassi underwear, the piles of Squornshellous mattresses and the man from Betelgeuse holding up a small yellow fish and offering to put it in his ear he had been able to see just a small packet of corn flakes.
Fie couldn't, and he didn't feel safe.
Suddenly a violent noise leapt at them from no source that he could identify.
Fie gasped in terror at what sounded like a man trying to gargle whilst fighting off a pack of wolves.
Ford, with a lightning movement, clapped his hand to Arthur's ear, and he had the sudden sickening sensation of the fish slithering deep into his aural tract.
Gasping with horror he scrabbled at his ear for a second or so, but then slowly turned goggle-eyed with wonder.
He was experiencing the aural equivalent of looking at a picture of two black silhouetted faces and suddenly seeing it as a picture of a white candlestick.
Or of looking at a lot of coloured dots on a piece of paper which suddenly resolve themselves into the figure six and mean that your optician is going to charge you a lot of money for a new pair of glasses.
He was still listening to the howling gargles, he knew that, only now it had taken on the semblance of perfectly straightforward English.
This is what he heard...
Message repeats.
This is your captain speaking, so stop whatever you're doing and pay attention.
First of all I see from our instruments that we have a couple of hitchhikers aboard.
Hello wherever you are.
I just want to make it totally clear that you are not at all welcome.
I worked hard to get where I am today, and I didn't become captain of a Vogon constructor ship simply so I could turn it into a taxi service for a load of degenerate freeloaders.
I have sent out a search party, and as soon that they find you I will put you off the ship.
On arrival we will stay in dock for a seventy-two hour refit, and no one's to leave the ship during that time.
I repeat, all planet leave is cancelled.
I've just had an unhappy love affair, so I don't see why anybody else should have a good time.
The noise stopped.
Arthur discovered to his embarrassment that he was lying curled up in a small ball on the floor with his arms wrapped round his head.
He smiled weakly.
Arthur thought about this.
It's a Babel fish.
He tossed over The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and then curled himself up into a foetal ball to prepare himself for the jump.
At that moment the bottom fell out of Arthur's mind.
His eyes turned inside out.
His feet began to leak out of the top of his head.
The room folded flat about him, spun around, shifted out of existence and left him sliding into his own navel.
They were passing through hyperspace.
It feeds on brainwave energy not from its carrier but from those around it.
It absorbs all unconscious mental frequencies from this brainwave energy to nourish itself with.
It then excretes into the mind of its carrier a telepathic matrix formed by combining the conscious thought frequencies with nerve signals picked up from the speech centres of the brain which has supplied them.
The practical upshot of all this is that if you stick a Babel fish in your ear you can instantly understand anything said to you in any form of language.
It could not have evolved by chance.
It proves you exist, and so therefore, by your own arguments, you don't.
Arthur let out a low groan.
He was horrified to discover that the kick through hyperspace hadn't killed him.
He was now six light years from the place that the Earth would have been if it still existed.
The Earth.
Visions of it swam sickeningly through his nauseated mind.
There was no way his imagination could feel the impact of the whole Earth having gone, it was too big.
He prodded his feelings by thinking that his parents and his sister had gone.
No reaction.
He thought of all the people he had been close to.
No reaction.
Then he thought of a complete stranger he had been standing behind in the queue at the supermarket before and felt a sudden stab - the supermarket was gone, everything in it was gone.
Nelson's Column had gone!
Nelson's Column had gone and there would be no outcry, because there was no one left to make an outcry.
From now on Nelson's Column only existed in his mind.
England only existed in his mind - his mind, stuck here in this dank smelly steel-lined spaceship.
A wave of claustrophobia closed in on him.
England no longer existed.
He'd got that - somehow he'd got it.
He tried again.
America, he thought, has gone.
He couldn't grasp it.
He decided to start smaller again.
New York has gone.
No reaction.
He'd never seriously believed it existed anyway.
The dollar, he thought, had sunk for ever.
Slight tremor there.
Every Bogart movie has been wiped, he said to himself, and that gave him a nasty knock.
McDonalds, he thought.
There is no longer any such thing as a McDonald's hamburger.
He passed out.
When he came round a second later he found he was sobbing for his mother.
He jerked himself violently to his feet.
Ford looked up from where he was sitting in a corner humming to himself.
Fie always found the actual travelling-through-space part of space travel rather trying.
FHe passed it over again.
Arthur grabbed hold of it and tried to stop his hands shaking.
FHe pressed the entry for the relevant page.
The screen flashed and swirled and resolved into a page of print.
Arthur stared at it.
Ford looked over his shoulder.
Arthur followed Ford's finger, and saw where it was pointing.
For a moment it still didn't register, then his mind nearly blew up.
Flarmless?
Is that all it's got to say?
Flarmless!
Ford shrugged.
Outside the door were the sounds of marching feet.
There was a sharp ringing rap on the door.
Chapter 7 Vogon poetry is of course the third worst in the Universe.
The second worst is that of the Azagoths of Kria.
The very worst poetry of all perished along with its creator Paula Nancy Millstone Jennings of Greenbridge, Essex, England in the destruction of the planet Earth.
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz smiled very slowly.
This was done not so much for effect as because he was trying to remember the sequence of muscle movements.
Fie had had a terribly therapeutic yell at his prisoners and was now feeling quite relaxed and ready for a little callousness.
The prisoners sat in Poetry Appreciation Chairs - strapped in.
Vogons suffered no illusions as to the regard their works were generally held in.
Their early attempts at composition had been part of bludgeoning insistence that they be accepted as a properly evolved and cultured race, but now the only thing that kept them going was sheer bloodymindedness.
The sweat stood out cold on Ford Prefect's brow, and slid round the electrodes strapped to his temples.
These were attached to a battery of electronic equipment - imagery intensifiers, rhythmic modulators, alliterative residulators and simile dumpers - all designed to heighten the experience of the poem and make sure that not a single nuance of the poet's thought was lost.
Arthur Dent sat and quivered.
He had no idea what he was in for, but he knew that he hadn't liked anything that had happened so far and didn't think things were likely to change.
The Vogon began to read - a fetid little passage of his own devising.
Spasms wracked Ford's body - this was worse than ever he'd been prepared for.
He could dimly see beside him Arthur lolling and rolling in his seat.
He clenched his teeth.
His voice was rising to a horrible pitch of impassioned stridency.
He went limp.
Arthur lolled.
He threw himself backwards into a huge leathery bat-shaped seat and watched them.
He did the smile again.
Ford was rasping for breath.
He rolled his dusty tongue round his parched mouth and moaned.
Ford turned and gaped.
Here was an approach that had quite simply not occurred to him.
The Vogon raised a surprised eyebrow that effectively obscured his nose and was therefore no bad thing.
Ford continued to stare at him, slowly organizing his thoughts around this totally new concept.
Were they really going to be able to bareface their way out of this?
He floundered.
He floundered too, but Arthur was ready again.
The Vogon perused them.
For a moment his embittered racial soul had been touched, but he thought no - too little too late.
His voice took on the quality of a cat snagging brushed nylon.
He paused.
Ford laughed a nervous laugh.
The Vogon stood up.
I'm going to throw you off the ship anyway.
Guard!
A huge young Vogon guard stepped forward and yanked them out of their straps with his huge blubbery arms.
It was the first phrase he'd learnt when he joined the Vogon Guard Corps.
The captain watched with detached amusement and then turned away.
Arthur stared round him wildly.
The guard grasped them both firmly round the neck, and bowing deferentially towards his captain's back, hoiked them both protesting out of the bridge.
A steel door closed and the captain was on his own again.
Fie hummed quietly and mused to himself, lightly fingering his notebook of verses.
Fie considered this for a moment, and then closed the book with a grim smile.
The long steel-lined corridor echoed to the feeble struggles of the two humanoids clamped firmly under rubbery Vogon armpits.
The Vogon guard dragged them on.
Fie didn't sound hopeful.
I woke up this morning and thought I'd have a nice relaxed day, do a bit of reading, brush the dog...
He spluttered and gurgled as the Vogon tightened his grip.
You wait till I've settled down into the situation and found my bearings.
Ford tried desperately to think, but was interrupted by the guard shouting again.
He twisted his head till he was looking straight up into his captor's face.
A thought struck him.
The Vogon stopped dead and a look of immense stupidity seeped slowly over his face.
The Vogon stared up at the low steel ceiling and his eyebrows almost rolled over each other.
His mouth slacked.
Arthur twisted his head to look at Ford.
The Vogon stared down at him as sluggish thoughts moiled around in the murky depths.
What is it?
The girls?
The leather?
The machismo?
I dunno.
I think I just sort of... do it really.
Arthur rather thought he had.
Apart from the unpleasant business with his home planet the Vogon guard had half-throttled him already and he didn't like the sound of being thrown into space very much.
Arthur agreed this was very sad.
He did this with a small feeble gesture, because he was too asphyxicated to speak.
Deep rumblings of bemusement came from the guard.
He felt he had to add something to that, but for the moment the guard seemed to have his mind occupied pondering that much.
Ford suddenly felt the moment slipping away.
But at that moment the guard renewed his grip and continued his original purpose of lugging his prisoners to the airlock.
He was obviously quite touched.
It wasn't all the same to Ford Prefect after all.
They had now reached the airlock - a large circular steel hatchway of massive strength and weight let into the inner skin of the craft.
The guard operated a control and the hatchway swung smoothly open.
He flung Ford and Arthur through the hatchway into the small chamber within.
Arthur lay panting for breath.
Ford scrambled round and flung his shoulder uselessly against the reclosing hatchway.
Desperately he grabbed for the only bit of culture he knew offhand - he hummed the first bar of Beethoven's Fifth.
If he said anything further after that it was lost.
The hatchway sealed itself tight, and all sound was lost but the faint distant hum of the ship's engines.
They were in a brightly polished cylindrical chamber about six feet in diameter and ten feet long.
Arthur was still lying in the curve of the floor where he had fallen.
He didn't look up.
He just lay panting.
I thought you said you were going to think of something.
Arthur looked up expectantly.
He kicked the hatch they'd just been through.
He stuck his hands behind his back, raised his eyebrows and started to hum an old Betelgeusian battle hymn.
To Arthur's eyes he suddenly looked very alien.
He slumped against the wall again and carried on the tune from where he left off.
Ford carried on humming.
Any second now all that will be left is Mostly Harmless.
A motor whirred.
A slight hiss built into a deafening roar of rushing air as the outer hatchway opened on to an empty blackness studded with tiny impossibly bright points of light.
Ford and Arthur popped into outer space like corks from a toy gun.
Chapter 8 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a wholly remarkable book.
It has been compiled and recompiled many times over many years and under many different editorships.
It contains contributions from countless numbers of travellers and researchers.
Really big.
You just won't believe how vastly hugely mindboggingly big it is.
I mean you may think it's a long way down the road to the chemist, but that's just peanuts to space.
To be fair though, when confronted by the sheer enormity of distances between the stars, better minds than the one responsible for the Guide's introduction have faltered.
Some invite you to consider for a moment a peanut in reading and a small walnut in Johannesburg, and other such dizzying concepts.
The simple truth is that interstellar distances will not fit into the human imagination.
Even light, which travels so fast that it takes most races thousands of years to realize that it travels at all, takes time to journey between the stars.
It takes eight minutes from the star Sol to the place where the Earth used to be, and four years more to arrive at Sol's nearest stellar neighbour.
Alpha Proxima.
For light to reach the other side of the Galaxy, for it to reach Damogran for instance, takes rather longer: five hundred thousand years.
The record for hitch hiking this distance is just under five years, but you don't get to see much on the way.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy says that if you hold a lungful of air you can survive in the total vacuum of space for about thirty seconds.
However it goes on to say that what with space being the mind boggling size it is the chances of getting picked up by another ship within those thirty seconds are two to the power of two hundred and sixty-seven thousand seven hundred and nine to one against.
By a totally staggering coincidence that is also the telephone number of an Islington flat where Arthur once went to a very good party and met a very nice girl whom he totally failed to get off with - she went off with a gatecrasher.
Though the planet Earth, the Islington flat and the telephone have all now been demolished, it is comforting to reflect that they are all in some small way commemorated by the fact that twenty-nine seconds later Ford and Arthur were rescued.
Chapter 9 A computer chatted to itself in alarm as it noticed an airlock open and close itself for no apparent reason.
This was because Reason was in fact out to lunch.
A hole had just appeared in the Galaxy.
It was exactly a nothingth of a second long, a nothingth of an inch wide, and quite a lot of million light years from end to end.
As it closed up lots of paper hats and party balloons fell out of it and drifted off through the universe.
A team of seven three-foot-high market analysts fell out of it and died, partly of asphyxication, partly of surprise.
Two hundred and thirty-nine thousand lightly fried eggs fell out of it too, materializing in a large woobly heap on the famine - struck land of Poghril in the Pansel system.
The whole Poghril tribe had died out from famine except for one last man who died of cholesterol poisoning some weeks later.
The nothingth of a second for which the hole existed reverberated backwards and forwards through time in a most improbable fashion.
Somewhere in the deeply remote past it seriously traumatized a small random group of atoms drifting through the empty sterility of space and made them cling together in the most extraordinarily unlikely patterns.
That was how life began in the Universe.
Five wild Event Maelstroms swirled in vicious storms of unreason and spewed up a pavement.
On the pavement lay Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent gulping like half-spent fish.
The real universe arched sickeningly away beneath them.
Various pretend ones flitted silently by, like mountain goats.
Primal light exploded, splattering space-time as with gobbets of junket.
Time blossomed, matter shrank away.
The highest prime number coalesced quietly in a corner and hid itself away for ever.
The Universe jumped, froze, quivered and splayed out in several unexpected directions.
Arthur and Ford opened their eyes and looked about in considerable surprise.
Ford thought about this.
They both sat on the pavement and watched with a certain unease as huge children bounced heavily along the sand and wild horses thundered through the sky taking fresh supplies of reinforced railings to the Uncertain Areas.
Wild yowling noises of pipes and strings seared through the wind, hot doughnuts popped out of the road for ten pence each, horrid fish stormed out of the sky and Arthur and Ford decided to make a run for it.
They plunged through heavy walls of sound, mountains of archaic thought, valleys of mood music, bad shoe sessions and footling bats and suddenly heard a girl's voice.
Ford skidded down a beam of light and span round trying to find a source for the voice but could see nothing he could seriously believe in.
You know, like two to one, three to one, five to four against.
It said two to the power of one hundred thousand to one against.
A million-gallon vat of custard upended itself over them without warning.
I don't know at all.
Bulges appeared in the fabric of space-time.
Great ugly bulges.
He wound his eyes desperately around in Ford's direction.
Again came the voice.
Ford waddled around his pond in a furious circle.
The voice cleared its throat.
A giant petit four lolloped off into the distance.
The voice continued.
You are bound to feel some initial ill effects as you have been rescued from certain death at an improbability level of two to the power of two hundred and seventy-six thousand to one against - possibly much higher.
We are now cruising at a level of two to the power of twenty-five thousand to one against and falling, and we will be restoring normality just as soon as we are sure what is normal anyway.
Thank you.
The voice cut out.
Ford and Arthur were in a small luminous pink cubicle.
Ford was wildly excited.
We've been picked up by a ship powered by the Infinite Improbability Drive!
This is incredible!
I heard rumors about it before!
They were all officially denied, but they must have done it!
They've built the Improbability Drive!
Arthur, this is...
Arthur?
Arthur had jammed himself against the door to the cubicle, trying to hold it closed, but it was ill fitting.
Tiny furry little hands were squeezing themselves through the cracks, their fingers were inkstained; tiny voices chattered insanely.
Arthur looked up.
Chapter 10 The Infinite Improbability Drive is a wonderful new method of crossing vast interstellar distances in a mere nothingth of a second, without all that tedious mucking about in hyperspace.
It was discovered by a lucky chance, and then developed into a governable form of propulsion by the Galactic Government's research team on Damogran.
This, briefly, is the story of its discovery.
Many respectable physicists said that they weren't going to stand for this - partly because it was a debasement of science, but mostly because they didn't get invited to those sort of parties.
Another thing they couldn't stand was the perpetual failure they encountered in trying to construct a machine which could generate the infinite improbability field needed to flip a spaceship across the mind-paralysing distances between the furthest stars, and in the end they grumpily announced that such a machine was virtually impossible.
Then, one day, a student who had been left to sweep up the lab after a particularly unsuccessful party found himself reasoning this way: If, he thought to himself, such a machine is a virtual impossibility, then it must logically be a finite improbability.
So all I have to do in order to make one is to work out exactly how improbable it is, feed that figure into the finite improbability generator, give it a fresh cup of really hot tea... and turn it on!
He did this, and was rather startled to discover that he had managed to create the long sought after golden Infinite Improbability generator out of thin air.
It startled him even more when just after he was awarded the Galactic Institute's Prize for Extreme Cleverness he got lynched by a rampaging mob of respectable physicists who had finally realized that the one thing they really couldn't stand was a smartass.
Chapter 11 The Improbability-proof control cabin of the Heart of Gold looked like a perfectly conventional spaceship except that it was perfectly clean because it was so new.
Some of the control seats hadn't had the plastic wrapping taken off yet.
The cabin was mostly white, oblong, and about the size of a smallish restaurant.
In fact it wasn't perfectly oblong: the two long walls were raked round in a slight parallel curve, and all the angles and corners were contoured in excitingly chunky shapes.
The truth of the matter is that it would have been a great deal simpler and more practical to build the cabin as an ordinary three- dimensional oblong rom, but then the designers would have got miserable.
As it was the cabin looked excitingly purposeful, with large video screens ranged over the control and guidance system panels on the concave wall, and long banks of computers set into the convex wall.
In one corner a robot sat humped, its gleaming brushed steel head hanging loosely between its gleaming brushed steel knees.
It too was fairly new, but though it was beautifully constructed and polished it somehow looked as if the various parts of its more or less humanoid body didn't quite fit properly.
In fact they fitted perfectly well, but something in its bearing suggested that they might have fitted better.
Zaphod Beeblebrox paced nervously up and down the cabin, brushing his hands over pieces of gleaming equipment and giggling with excitement.
Trillian sat hunched over a clump of instruments reading off figures.
Her voice was carried round the Tannoy system of the whole ship.
Please relax.
Trillian span her seat round to face him and shrugged.
I mean, here we are on the run and everything, we must have the police of half the Galaxy after us by now, and we stop to pick up hitchhikers.
He tapped irritably at a control panel.
Trillian quietly moved his hand before he tapped anything important.
Whatever Zaphod's qualities of mind might include - dash, bravado, conceit - he was mechanically inept and could easily blow the ship up with an extravagant gesture.
Trillian had come to suspect that the main reason why he had had such a wild and successful life that he never really understood the significance of anything he did.
Not die as such?
Trillian cocked her head on one side.
They're just a couple of guys I expect.
I'll send the robot down to get them and bring them up here.
In the corner, the robot's head swung up sharply, but then wobbled about imperceptibly.
It pulled itself up to its feet as if it was about five pounds heavier that it actually was, and made what an outside observer would have thought was a heroic effort to cross the room.
It stopped in front of Trillian and seemed to stare through her left shoulder.
Its voice was low and hopeless.
With a microsecond pause, and a finely calculated micromodulation of pitch and timbre - nothing you could actually take offence at - Marvin managed to convey his utter contempt and horror of all things human.
Zaphod leaped out of his seat.
Marvin turned and lifted his flat-topped triangular red eyes up towards him.
He turned hopelessly on his heel and lugged himself out of the cabin.
The Encyclopaedia Galactica defines a robot as a mechanical apparatus designed to do the work of a man.
The pink cubicle had winked out of existence, the monkeys had sunk away to a better dimension.
Ford and Arthur found themselves in the embarkation area of the ship.
It was rather smart.
Ah!
Ford jabbed at one of the pages and showed it to Arthur.
As soon as the ship's drive reaches Infinite Improbability it passes through every point in the Universe.
Ford hunted excitedly through the technical specs of the ship, occasionally gasping with astonishment at what he read - clearly Galactic astrotechnology had moved ahead during the years of his exile.
Arthur listened for a short while, but being unable to understand the vast majority of what Ford was saying he began to let his mind wander, trailing his fingers along the edge of an incomprehensible computer bank, he reached out and pressed an invitingly large red button on a nearby panel.
The panel lit up with the words Please do not press this button again.
He shook himself.
The voice was low and hopeless and accompanied by a slight clanking sound.
They span round and saw an abject steel man standing hunched in the doorway.
Absolutely ghastly.
Just don't even talk about it.
The irony circuits cut into his voice modulator as he mimicked the style of the sales brochure.
As the door closed behind them it became apparent that it did indeed have a satisfied sigh-like quality to it.
Marvin regarded it with cold loathing whilst his logic circuits chattered with disgust and tinkered with the concept of directing physical violence against it Further circuits cut in saying, Why bother?
What's the point?
Nothing is worth getting involved in.
For a quick encore they measured the level of hydrogen emissions in the surrounding cubic parsec of space and then shut down again in boredom.
A spasm of despair shook the robot's body as he turned.
Flere I am, brain the size of a planet and they ask me to take you down to the bridge.
Call that job satisfaction?
Fie turned and walked back to the hated door.
Marvin ignored him.
With an ingratiating little whine the door slit open again and Marvin stomped through.
The others followed quickly and the door slit back into place with pleased little clicks and whirrs.
So they tried it out with me.
I'm a personality prototype.
Ford and Arthur muttered embarrassed little disclaimers.
Something extraordinary happened to Ford's face.
At least five entirely separate and distinct expressions of shock and amazement piled up on it in a jumbled mess.
His left leg, which was in mid stride, seemed to have difficulty in finding the floor again.
Fie stared at the robot and tried to entangle some dartoid muscles.
Flere's another of those self-satisfied door.
Life!
Ford stared at him.
Chapter 12 A loud clatter of gunk music flooded through the Heart of Gold cabin as Zaphod searched the sub-etha radio wavebands for news of himself.
The machine was rather difficult to operate.
For years radios had been operated by means of pressing buttons and turning dials; then as the technology became more sophisticated the controls were made touch-sensitive-you merely had to brush the panels with your fingers; now all you had to do was wave your hand in the general direction of the components and hope.
It saved a lot of muscular expenditure of course, but meant that you had to sit infuriatingly still if you wanted to keep listening to the same programme.
Zaphod waved a hand and the channel switched again.
More gunk music, but this time it was a background to a news announcement.
The news was always heavily edited to fit the rhythms of the music.
And of course, the big news story tonight is the sensational theft of the new Improbability Drive prototype ship by none other than Galactic President Zaphod Beeblebrox.
And the question everyone's asking is... has the big Z finally flipped?
Beeblebrox, the man who invented the Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster, ex-confidence trickster, once described by Eccentrica Gallumbits as the Best Bang since the Big One, and recently voted the Worst Dressed Sentinent Being in the Known Universe for the seventh time... has he got an answer this time?
The music swirled and dived for a moment.
Another voice broke in, presumably Halfrunt.
Zaphod turned and glared at Trillian - she had thrown the pencil.
Trillian was tapping her fingers on a screenful of figures.
Zaphod glared at her again, then laughed.
One of the major difficulties Trillian experienced in her relationship with Zaphod was learning to distinguish between him pretending to be stupid just to get people off their guard, pretending to be stupid because he couldn't be bothered to think and wanted someone else to do it for him, pretending to be outrageously stupid to hide the fact that he actually didn't understand what was going on, and really being genuinely stupid.
He was renowned for being amazingly clever and quite clearly was so - but not all the time, which obviously worried him, hence the act.
He proffered people to be puzzled rather than contemptuous.
This above all appeared to Trillian to be genuinely stupid, but she could no longer be bothered to argue about it.
She sighed and punched up a star map on the visiscreen so she could make it simple for him, whatever his reasons for wanting it to be that way.
Parts of the inside of her head screamed at other parts of the inside of her head.
He looked at her and then looked back at the screen.
We should have zapped straight into the middle of the Horsehead Nebula.
How did we come to be there?
She ignored this.
Out of the whole of the Universe to choose from?
That's just too...
I want to work this out.
The Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Shipboard Computer which controlled and permeated every particle of the ship switched into communication mode.
The ticker tape said, Hi there!
He hadn't worked with this computer for long but had already learned to loathe it.
The computer continued, brash and cheery as if it was selling detergent.
Zaphod and Trillian pored over the figures that the Improbability flight path scanner flashed silently up in front of them.
Trillian punched up the figures.
Zaphod scribbled a few sums, crossed them out and threw the pencil away.
Zaphod knocked his two heads together in irritation and gritted his teeth.
The voice circuits sprang to life again.
A pained look crawled across one of Zaphod's faces and on to the other one.
Trillian gasped.
She scrabbled at the buttons on the Improbability flight path screen.
Numbers flashed up on the screen.
The computer had paused politely, but now it continued.
Chapter 13 Marvin trudged on down the corridor, still moaning.
Vague whistling and humming noises were coming from Ford.
Suddenly Marvin stopped, and held up a hand.
There was a sliding door let into the side of the corridor.
Marvin eyed it suspiciously.
This is the entrance to the bridge.
I was told to take you to the bridge.
Slowly, with great loathing, he stepped towards the door, like a hunter stalking his prey.
Suddenly it slid open.
Deep in Marvin's thorax gears ground.
Fie heaved himself through the door and left Ford and Arthur staring at each other and shrugging their shoulders.
From inside they heard Marvin's voice again.
Arthur looked at Ford and was astonished to see him laughing.
Fie stepped through into the bridge.
Arthur followed him in nervously and was astonished to see a man lolling back in a chair with his feet on a control console picking the teeth in his right-hand head with his left hand.
The right-hand head seemed to be thoroughly preoccupied with this task, but the left-hand one was grinning a broad, relaxed, nonchalant grin.
The number of things that Arthur couldn't believe he was seeing was fairly large.
FHis jaw flapped about at a loose end for a while.
Ford was not going to be outcooled.
Arthur goggled at him.
Ford carried on.
When you're cruising down the road in the fast lane and you lazily sail past a few hard driving cars and are feeling pretty pleased with yourself and then accidentally change down from fourth to first instead of third thus making your engine leap out of your bonnet in a rather ugly mess, it tends to throw you off your stride in much the same way that this remark threw Ford Prefect off his.
Zaphod gave an awkward start of surprise and jabbed a gum sharply.
Ford rounded on Arthur with an angry flash in his eyes.
Now he felt he was back on home ground he suddenly began to resent having lumbered himself with this ignorant primitive who knew as much about the affairs of the Galaxy as an Ilford-based gnat knew about life in Peking.
We've met, haven't we Zaphod Beeblebrox - or should I say...
Arthur would not be deterred.
On Earth...
Zaphod shook his head with a tight-lipped smile.
This wasn't fair on Ford at all.
He looked backwards and forwards between Arthur and Zaphod.
Well alright, I wasn't doing very well with her.
I'd been trying all evening.
Hell, she was something though.
Beautiful, charming, devastatingly intelligent, at last I'd got her to myself for a bit and was plying her with a bit of talk when this friend of yours barges up and says Hey doll, is this guy boring you?
Why don't you talk to me instead?
She gave Arthur a pleasant smile which settled on him like a ton of bricks and then turned her attention to the ship's controls again.
There was silence for a few seconds, and then out of the scrambled mess of Arthur's brain crawled some words.
After all with a degree in Maths and another in astrophysics what else was there to do?
Zaphod looked about him, at Ford, at Arthur, and then at Trillian.
Chapter 14 The Heart of Gold fled on silently through the night of space, now on conventional photon drive.
Its crew of four were ill at ease knowing that they had been brought together not of their own volition or by simple coincidence, but by some curious principle of physics - as if relationships between people were susceptible to the same laws that governed the relationships between atoms and molecules.
As the ship's artificial night closed in they were each grateful to retire to separate cabins and try to rationalize their thoughts.
Trillian couldn't sleep.
She sat on a couch and stared at a small cage which contained her last and only links with Earth - two white mice that she had insisted Zaphod let her bring.
She had expected not to see the planet again, but she was disturbed by her negative reaction to the planet's destruction.
It seemed remote and unreal and she could find no thoughts to think about it.
She watched the mice scurrying round the cage and running furiously in their little plastic treadwheels till they occupied her whole attention.
Suddenly she shook herself and went back to the bridge to watch over the tiny flashing lights and figures that charted the ship's progress through the void.
She wished she knew what it was she was trying not to think about.
Zaphod couldn't sleep.
He also wished he knew what it was that he wouldn't let himself think about.
For as long as he could remember he'd suffered from a vague nagging feeling of being not all there.
Most of the time he was able to put this thought aside and not worry about it, but it had been re-awakened by the sudden inexplicable arrival of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent.
Somehow it seemed to conform to a pattern that he couldn't see.
Ford couldn't sleep.
He was too excited about being back on the road again.
Fifteen years of virtual imprisonment were over, just as he was finally beginning to give up hope.
Knocking about with Zaphod for a bit promised to be a lot of fun, though there seemed to be something faintly odd about his semi-cousin that he couldn't put his finger on.
The fact that he had become President of the Galaxy was frankly astonishing, as was the manner of his leaving the post.
Was there a reason behind it?
There would be no point in asking Zaphod, he never appeared to have a reason for anything he did at all: he had turned unfathomably into an art form.
He attacked everything in life with a mixture of extraordinary genius and naive incompetence and it was often difficult to tell which was which.
Arthur slept: he was terribly tired.
There was a tap at Zaphod's door.
It slid open.
Ford gave up the attempt to sleep.
In the corner of his cabin was a small computer screen and keyboard.
He sat at it for a while and tried to compose a new entry for the Guide on the subject of Vogons but couldn't think of anything vitriolic enough so he gave that up too, wrapped a robe round himself and went for a walk to the bridge.
As he entered he was surprised to see two figures hunched excitedly over the instruments.
Zaphod heard a noise and looked up.
Ford went and had a look at it.
It was a series of figures flashing over a screen.
Light on the bridge sank.
Pinpoints of light played across the consoles and reflected in four pairs of eyes that stared up at the external monitor screens.
There was absolutely nothing on them.
Ford frowned.
Zaphod laughed.
He was clearly very excited about something, almost childishly so.
For a moment it seemed that nothing was happening, then a brightness glowed at the edge of the huge screen.
A red star the size of a small plate crept across it followed quickly by another one - a binary system.
Then a vast crescent sliced into the corner of the picture - a red glare shading away into the deep black, the night side of the planet.
Ford stared at it in astonishment.
Mighty starships plied their way between exotic suns, seeking adventure and reward amongst the furthest reaches of Galactic space.
In those days spirits were brave, the stakes were high, men were real men, women were real women, and small furry creatures from Alpha Centauri were real small furry creatures from Alpha Centauri.
And all dared to brave unknown terrors, to do mighty deeds, to boldly split infinitives that no man had split before - and thus was the Empire forged.
Many men of course became extremely rich, but this was perfectly natural and nothing to be ashamed of because no one was really poor - at least no one worth speaking of.
And for all the richest and most successful merchants life inevitably became rather dull and niggly, and they began to imagine that this was therefore the fault of the worlds they'd settled on - none of them was entirely satisfactory: either the climate wasn't quite right in the later part of the afternoon, or the day was half an hour too long, or the sea was exactly the wrong shade of pink.
And thus were created the conditions for a staggering new form of specialist industry: custom-made luxury planet building.
The home of this industry was the planet Magrathea, where hyperspatial engineers sucked matter through white holes in space to form it into dream planets - gold planets, platinum planets, soft rubber planets with lots of earthquakes - all lovingly made to meet the exacting standards that the Galaxy's richest men naturally came to expect.
But so successful was this venture that Magrathea itself soon became the richest planet of all time and the rest of the Galaxy was reduced to abject poverty.
And so the system broke down, the Empire collapsed, and a long sullen silence settled over a billion worlds, disturbed only by the pen scratchings of scholars as they laboured into the night over smug little treaties on the value of a planned political economy.
Magrathea itself disappeared and its memory soon passed into the obscurity of legend.
In these enlightened days of course, no one believes a word of it.
Chapter 16 Arthur awoke to the sound of argument and went to the bridge.
Ford was waving his arms about.
Arthur looked inquiringly at Trillian.
She motioned him to come on in but keep quiet.
Trillian interrupted.
I'm not arguing with anyone, it's just that I wouldn't know Magrathea from any other lump of cold rock.
A dark featureless mass once more filled the screens - the planet rolling away beneath them.
They watched for a moment in silence, but Zaphod was fidgety with excitement.
The planet rolled on.
He was trying to restore a sense of occasion to what he felt should have been a great moment.
Magrathea!
He was piqued by Ford's sceptical reaction.
Magrathea!
The moment carried itself.
Even the most seasoned star tramp can't help but shiver at the spectacular drama of a sunrise seen from space, but a binary sunrise is one of the marvels of the Galaxy.
Out of the utter blackness stabbed a sudden point of blinding light.
It crept up by slight degrees and spread sideways in a thin crescent blade, and within seconds two suns were visible, furnaces of light, searing the black edge of the horizon with white fire.
Fierce shafts of colour streaked through the thin atmosphere beneath them.
The suns blazed into the pitch of space and a low ghostly music floated through the bridge: Marvin was humming ironically because he hated humans so much.
As Ford gazed at the spectacle of light before them excitement burnt inside him, but only the excitement of seeing a strange new planet, it was enough for him to see it as it was.
It faintly irritated him that Zaphod had to impose some ludicrous fantasy on to the scene to make it work for him.
All this Magrathea nonsense seemed juvenile.
Isn't it enough to see that a garden is beautiful without having to believe that there are fairies at the bottom of it too?
All this Magrathea business seemed totally incomprehensible to Arthur.
He edged up to Trillian and asked her what was going on.
Arthur blinked at the screens and felt he was missing something important.
Suddenly he realized what it was.
More of the planet was unfolding beneath them as the Heart of Gold streaked along its orbital path.
The suns now stood high in the black sky, the pyrotechnics of dawn were over, and the surface of the planet appeared bleak and forbidding in the common light of day - grey, dusty and only dimly contoured.
It looked dead and cold as a crypt.
From time to time promising features would appear on the distant horizon - ravines, maybe mountains, maybe even cities - but as they approached the lines would soften and blur into anonymity and nothing would transpire.
The planet's surface was blurred by time, by the slow movement of the thin stagnant air that had crept across it for century upon century.
Clearly, it was very very old.
A moment of doubt came to Ford as he watched the grey landscape move beneath them.
The immensity of time worried him, he could feel it as a presence.
He cleared his throat.
I take it you're not here for the sheer industrial archaeology of it all.
One of Zaphod's heads looked away.
The other one looked round to see what the first was looking at, but it wasn't looking at anything very much.
Ford glanced at him sharply.
He got a very strong impression that Zaphod hadn't the faintest idea why he was there at all.
Bullshit, thought Ford.
Even supposing this was the home of some ancient civilization now gone to dust, even supposing a number of exceedingly unlikely things, there was no way that vast treasures of wealth were going to be stored there in any form that would still have meaning now.
He shrugged.
Stress and nervous tension are now serious social problems in all parts of the Galaxy, and it is in order that this situation should not in any way be exacerbated that the following facts will now be revealed in advance.
The planet in question is in fact the legendary Magrathea.
The deadly missile attack shortly to be launched by an ancient automatic defence system will result merely in the breakage of three coffee cups and a micecage, the bruising of somebody's upper arm, and the untimely creation and sudden demise of a bowl of petunias and an innocent sperm whale.
In order that some sense of mystery should still be preserved, no revelation will yet be made concerning whose upper arm sustained the bruise.
This fact may safely be made the subject of suspense since it is of no significance whatsoever.
Chapter 17 After a fairly shaky start to the day, Arthur's mind was beginning to reassemble itself from the shellshocked fragments the previous day had left him with.
He had found a Nutri-Matic machine which had provided him with a plastic cup filled with a liquid that was almost, but not quite, entirely unlike tea.
The way it functioned was very interesting.
When the Drink button was pressed it made an instant but highly detailed examination of the subject's taste buds, a spectroscopic analysis of the subject's metabolism and then sent tiny experimental signals down the neural pathways to the taste centres of the subject's brain to see what was likely to go down well.
However, no one knew quite why it did this because it invariably delivered a cupful of liquid that was almost, but not quite, entirely unlike tea.
The Nutri-Matic was designed and manufactured by the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation whose complaints department now covers all the major land masses of the first three planets in the Sirius Tau Star system.
Arthur drank the liquid and found it reviving.
He glanced up at the screens again and watched a few more hundred miles of barren greyness slide past.
It suddenly occurred to him to ask a question which had been bothering him.
At which point a strange and inexplicable sound thrilled suddenly through the bridge - a noise as of a distant fanfare; a hollow, reedy, insubstantial sound.
It preceded a voice that was equally hollow, reedy and insubstantial.
Someone from the dead planet was talking to them.
The voice was old, courteous, almost charming, but was underscored with quite unmistakable menace.
Thank you.
A short buzz followed, then silence.
They waited.
After a second or so came the fanfare once again, and then the voice.
The menace in the voice took on a sharper edge.
Arthur looked round the nervous faces of his companions.
This time the fanfare was quite perfunctory, the voice distinctly cold.
The voice snapped off.
That's just a recorded message.
It's millions of years old.
Ford tapped Zaphod on the shoulder and pointed at the rear screen.
Clear in the distance behind them two silver darts were climbing through the atmosphere towards the ship.
A quick change of magnification brought them into close focus - two massively real rockets thundering through the sky.
The suddenness of it was shocking.
Zaphod stared at them in astonishment.
Second by second the image of the missiles on the screen became larger.
They had swung round now on to a direct homing course so that all that could be seen of them now was the warheads, head on.
Zaphod tried to run in several equally decisive directions simultaneously.
Several large desk panels slid open and banks of control consoles sprang up out of them, showering the crew with bits of expanded polystyrene packaging and balls of rolled-up cellophane: these controls had never been used before.
Zaphod stared at them wildly.
Ford leapt to the controls - only a few of them made any immediate sense to him so he pulled those.
The ship shook and screamed as its guidance rocked jets tried to push it every which way simultaneously.
Fie released half of them and the ship span round in a tight arc and headed back the way it had come, straight towards the oncoming missiles.
Air cushions ballooned out of the walls in an instant as everyone was thrown against them.
For a few seconds the inertial forces held them flattened and squirming for breath, unable to move.
Zaphod struggled and pushed in manic desperation and finally managed a savage kick at a small lever that formed part of the guidance system.
The lever snapped off.
The ship twisted sharply and rocketed upwards.
The crew were hurled violently back across the cabin.
It was of course more or less at this moment that one of the crew sustained a nasty bruise to the upper arm.
This should be emphasized because, as had already been revealed, they escape otherwise completely unharmed and the deadly nuclear missiles do not eventually hit the ship.
The safety of the crew is absolutely assured.
With a subtle roar the engines cut back in, the ship smoothly flattened out of its dive and headed back towards the missiles again.
The computer started to sing.
Zaphod screamed at it to shut up, but his voice was lost in the din of what they quite naturally assumed was approaching destruction.
Eddie wailed.
The ship, in flattening out had in fact flattened out upside down and lying on the ceiling as they were it was now totally impossible for any of the crew to reach the guidance systems.
The two missiles loomed massively on the screens as they thundered towards the ship.
But by an extraordinarily lucky chance they had not yet fully corrected their flight paths to that of the erratically weaving ship, and they passed right under it.
Revised impact time fifteen seconds fellas...
The missiles banked round in a screeching arc and plunged back into pursuit.
A thought struck Arthur.
He struggled to his feet.
Arthur scrambled up on to one end of the excitingly chunky pieces of moulded contouring where the curve of the wall met the ceiling.
Impact minus five seconds, it's been great knowing you guys, God bless...
The next thing that happened was a mid-mangling explosion of noise and light.
Chapter 18 And the next thing that happened after that was that the Heart of Gold continued on its way perfectly normally with a rather fetchingly redesigned interior.
It was somewhat larger, and done out in delicate pastel shades of green and blue.
In the centre a spiral staircase, leading nowhere in particular, stood in a spray of ferns and yellow flowers and next to it a stone sundial pedestal housed the main computer terminal.
Cunningly deployed lighting and mirrors created the illusion of standing in a conservatory overlooking a wide stretch of exquisitely manicured garden.
Around the periphery of the conservatory area stood marble-topped tables on intricately beautiful wrought-iron legs.
As you gazed into the polished surface of the marble the vague forms of instruments became visible, and as you touched them the instruments materialized instantly under your hands.
Looked at from the correct angles the mirrors appeared to reflect all the required data readouts, though it was far from clear where they were reflected from.
It was in fact sensationally beautiful.
There was a potted plant there now.
Zaphod leapt out of his seat.
A new and astounding image appeared in the mirrors.
Zaphod stared at Arthur.
Turn on the Improbability Drive for a second without first activating the proofing screens.
Another thing that got forgotten was the fact that against all probability a sperm whale had suddenly been called into existence several miles above the surface of an alien planet.
And since this is not a naturally tenable position for a whale, this poor innocent creature had very little time to come to terms with its identity as a whale before it then had to come to terms with not being a whale any more.
This is a complete record of its thoughts from the moment it began its life till the moment it ended it.
Ah...!
What's happening? it thought.
Er, excuse me, who am I?
Hello?
Why am I here?
What's my purpose in life?
What do I mean by who am I?
Calm down, get a grip now... oh! this is an interesting sensation, what is it?
It's a sort of... yawning, tingling sensation in my... my... well I suppose I'd better start finding names for things if I want to make any headway in what for the sake of what I shall call an argument I shall call the world, so let's call it my stomach.
Good.
Ooooh, it's getting quite strong.
And hey, what's about this whistling roaring sound going past what I'm suddenly going to call my head?
Perhaps I can call that... wind!
Is that a good name?
It'll do... perhaps I can find a better name for it later when I've found out what it's for.
It must be something very important because there certainly seems to be a hell of a lot of it.
Hey!
What's this thing?
This... let's call it a tail - yeah, tail.
Hey!
I can really thrash it about pretty good can't I?
Wow!
Wow!
That feels great!
Doesn't seem to achieve very much but I'll probably find out what it's for later on.
Now - have I built up any coherent picture of things yet?
No.
Never mind, hey, this is really exciting, so much to find out about, so much to look forward to, I'm quite dizzy with anticipation...
Or is it the wind?
There really is a lot of that now isn't it?
And wow!
Hey!
What's this thing suddenly coming towards me very fast?
Very very fast.
So big and flat and round, it needs a big wide sounding name like... ow... ound... round... ground!
That's it!
That's a good name - ground!
I wonder if it will be friends with me?
And the rest, after a sudden wet thud, was silence.
Curiously enough, the only thing that went through the mind of the bowl of petunias as it fell was Oh no, not again.
Many people have speculated that if we knew exactly why the bowl of petunias had thought that we would know a lot more about the nature of the universe than we do now.
Zaphod glanced away from the mirror screens which presented a panoramic view of the blighted landscape on which the Heart of Gold had now landed.
No, don't bother to answer that.
I'm fifty thousand times more intelligent than you and even I don't know the answer.
Trillian burst in through the door from her cabin.
An expression of deep worry and concern failed to cross either of Zaphod's faces.
Trillian glared an upset glare at him, and disappeared again.
The voice was oddly familiar, but oddly different.
It had a matriarchal twang.
It announced itself to the crew as they arrived at the airlock hatchway that would let them out on the planet surface.
They looked at each other in puzzlement.
Zaphod tapped impatiently on the hatch.
He was desperately worried that one day sentinent life forms would forget how to do this.
Only by counting could humans demonstrate their independence of computers.
Eddie, shocked, paused and considered this.
Ford carried on counting quietly.
This is about the most aggressive thing you can do to a computer, the equivalent of going up to a human being and saying Blood... blood... blood... blood...
An icy wind ripped into them, they hugged themselves warmly and stepped down the ramp on to the barren dust of Magrathea.
A few minutes later he opened and closed the hatchway again response to a command that caught him entirely by surprise.
Chapter 20 Five figures wandered slowly over the blighted land.
Bits of it were dullish grey, bits of it dullish brown, the rest of it rather less interesting to look at.
It was like a dried-out marsh, now barren of all vegetation and covered with a layer of dust about an inch thick.
It was very cold.
Zaphod was clearly rather depressed about it.
He stalked off by himself and was soon lost to sight behind a slight rise in the ground.
The wind stung Arthur's eyes and ears, and the stale thin air clasped his throat.
However, the thing stung most was his mind.
Sound carried badly in this thin atmosphere.
He felt a mounting irritation.
Of all the planets in all the star systems of all the Galaxy - didn't he just have to turn up at a dump like this after fifteen years of being a castaway?
Not even a hot dog stand in evidence.
He stooped down and picked up a cold clot of earth, but there was nothing underneath it worth crossing thousands of light years to look at.
Trillian hugged herself, shivered and frowned.
She could have sworn she saw a slight and unexpected movement out of the corner of her eye, but when she glanced in that direction all she could see was the ship, still and silent, a hundred yards or so behind them.
She was relieved when a second or so later they caught sight of Zaphod standing on top of the ridge of ground and waving to them to come and join him.
He seemed to be excited, but they couldn't clearly hear what he was saying because of the thinnish atmosphere and the wind.
As they approached the ridge of higher ground they became aware that it seemed to be circular - a crater about a hundred and fifty yards wide.
Round the outside of the crater the sloping ground was spattered with black and red lumps.
They stopped and looked at a piece.
It was wet.
It was rubbery.
With horror they suddenly realized that it was fresh whalemeat.
At the top of the crater's lip they met Zaphod.
In the centre lay the exploded carcass of a lonely sperm whale that hadn't lived long enough to be disappointed with its lot.
The silence was only disturbed by the slight involuntary spasms of Trillian's throat.
They all hesitated.
An underground passage.
The force of the whale's impact cracked it open, and that's where we have to go.
Marvin started his ironical humming again.
Zaphod hit him and he shut up.
With little shudders of disgust they all followed Zaphod down the incline into the crater, trying very hard not to look at its unfortunate creator.
The ground had caved in where the whale had hit it revealing a network of galleries and passages, now largely obstructed by collapsed rubble and entrails.
Zaphod had made a start clearing a way into one of them, but Marvin was able to do it rather faster.
Dank air wafted out of its dark recesses, and as Zaphod shone a torch into it, little was visible in the dusty gloom.
Zaphod scrambled down into the passage, followed by Trillian and Ford.
In a few seconds they had disappeared from view.
Arthur stamped around in a huff, and then decided that a whale's graveyard is not on the whole a good place to stamp around in.
Marvin eyed him balefully for a moment, and then turned himself off.
Zaphod marched quickly down the passageway, nervous as hell, but trying to hide it by striding purposefully.
He flung the torch beam around.
The walls were covered in dark tiles and were cold to the touch, the air thick with decay.
Trillian was reminded unavoidably of the London Underground, though it was less thoroughly squalid.
At intervals along the walls the tiles gave way to large mosaics - simple angular patterns in bright colours.
Trillian stopped and studied one of them but could not interpret any sense in them.
She called to Zaphod.
Trillian shrugged and hurried after him.
From time to time a doorway led either to the left or right into smallish chambers which Ford discovered to be full of derelict computer equipment.
He dragged Zaphod into one to have a look.
Trillian followed.
What you have so far said nothing about is how in the Galaxy you found it.
Government archives.
Detective work.
Few lucky guesses.
For a long time nobody said anything as Ford gazed at Zaphod with a mind suddenly full of worry.
I get an idea to do something, and, hey, why not, I do it.
I reckon I'll become President of the Galaxy, and it just happens, it's easy.
I decide to steal this ship.
I decide to look for Magrathea, and it all just happens.
Yeah, I work out how it can best be done, right, but it always works out.
It's like having a Galacticredit card which keeps on working though you never send off the cheques.
And then whenever I stop and think - why did I want to do something? - how did I work out how to do it? - I get a very strong desire just to stop thinking about it.
Like I have now.
Zaphod paused for a while.
For a while there was silence.
About the fact that part of my mind just didn't seem to work properly.
Then it occurred to me that the way it seemed was that someone else was using my mind to have good ideas with, without telling me about it.
I put the two ideas together and decided that maybe that somebody had locked off part of my mind for that purpose, which was why I couldn't use it.
I wondered if there was a way I could check.
I went through every major screening test on both my heads - all the tests I had to go through under government medical officers before my nomination for Presidency could be properly ratified.
They showed up nothing.
Nothing unexpected at least.
They showed that I was clever, imaginative, irresponsible, untrustworthy, extrovert, nothing you couldn't have guessed.
And no other anomalies.
So I started inventing further tests, completely at random.
Nothing.
Then I tried superimposing the results from one head on top of the results from the other head.
Still nothing.
Finally I got silly, because I'd given it all up as nothing more than an attack of paranoia.
Last thing I did before I packed it in was take the superimposed picture and look at it through a green filter.
You remember I was always superstitious about the color green when I was a kid?
Ford nodded.
A whole section in the middle of both brains that related only to each other and not to anything else around them.
Ford stared at him, aghast.
Trillian had turned white.
I can only guess.
Ford stared at him in horror and felt his skin begin to crawl.
Zaphod looked at him in silence again for a moment.
Then he looked away.
At that moment a steel shutter slammed down behind them and gas started to pour into the chamber.
Chapter 21 On the surface of Magrathea Arthur wandered about moodily.
Ford had thoughtfully left him his copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy to while away the time with.
He pushed a few buttons at random.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a very unevenly edited book and contains many passages that simply seemed to its editors like a good idea at the time.
There followed a long period of painstaking research during which he visited all the major centres of biro loss throughout the galaxy and eventually came up with a quaint little theory which quite caught the public imagination at the time.
Somewhere in the cosmos, he said, along with all the planets inhabited by humanoids, reptiloids, fishoids, walking treeoids and superintendent shades of the colour blue, there was also a planet entirely given over to biro life forms.
And it was to this planet that unattended biros would make their way, slipping away quietly through wormholes in space to a world where they knew they could enjoy a uniquely biroid lifestyle, responding to highly biro-oriented stimuli, and generally leading the biro equivalent of the good life.
And as theories go this was all very fine and pleasant until Veet Voojagig suddenly claimed to have found this planet, and to have worked there for a while driving a limousine for a family of cheap green retractables, whereupon he was taken away, locked up, wrote a book, and was finally sent into tax exile, which is the usual fate reserved for those who are determined to make a fool of themselves in public.
When one day an expedition was sent to the spatial coordinates that Voojagig had claimed for this planet they discovered only a small asteroid inhabited by a solitary old man who claimed repeatedly that nothing was true, though he was later discovered to be lying.
There did, however, remain the question of both the mysterious 60,000 Altairan dollars paid yearly into his Brantisvogan bank account, and of course Zaphod Beeblebrox's highly profitable second-hand biro business.
Arthur read this, and put the book down.
The robot still sat there, completely inert.
Arthur got up and walked to the top of the crater.
He walked around the crater.
He watched two suns set magnificently over Magrathea.
He went back down into the crater.
He woke the robot up because even a manically depressed robot is better to talk to than nobody.
From the heart of a dark nebula it is possible to see very few stars, and only very faintly, but they were there to be seen.
The robot obediently looked at them, then looked back.
I've never seen anything like it in my wildest dreams... the two suns!
Arthur couldn't bear any more.
He had got up again.
Arthur slapped his arms about himself to try and get his circulation a little more enthusiastic about its job.
He trudged back up the wall of the crater.
Because the atmosphere was so thin and because there was no moon, nightfall was very rapid and it was by now very dark.
Because of this, Arthur practically walked into the old man before he noticed him.
Chapter 22 He was standing with his back to Arthur watching the very last glimmers of light sink into blackness behind the horizon.
He was tallish, elderly and dressed in a single long grey robe.
When he turned his face was thin and distinguished, careworn but not unkind, the sort of face you would happily bank with.
But he didn't turn yet, not even to react to Arthur's yelp of surprise.
Eventually the last rays of the sun had vanished completely, and he turned.
His face was still illuminated from somewhere, and when Arthur looked for the source of the light he saw that a few yards away stood a small craft of some kind - a small hovercraft, Arthur guessed.
It shed a dim pool of light around it.
The man looked at Arthur, sadly it seemed.
The man looked away.
Again a kind of sadness seemed to cross his face.
He seemed to have something on his mind.
Conversation was clearly something he felt he didn't have to rush at.
Arthur felt awkward.
The man looked round to him again and slightly raised his eyebrows.
Arthur frowned at him.
The man chuckled slightly.
He had an odd felling of being like a man in the act of adultery who is surprised when the woman's husband wanders into the room, changes his trousers, passes a few idle remarks about the weather and leaves again.
Actually you see, we weren't really expecting to find anybody about in fact.
He paused and looked at Arthur.
The man stifled a very slight yawn and continued.
Arthur, a regular Guardian reader, was deeply shocked at this.
He pointed down into the crater.
Arthur was quite surprised to hear a note of decision suddenly present in the old man's voice.
He called to Marvin who crawled up the slope making a big show of being lame, which he wasn't.
You must come with me.
He turned towards his craft which, though no apparent signal had been given, now drifted quietly towards them through the dark.
Arthur looked down at Marvin, who now made an equally big show of turning round laboriously and trudging off down into the crater again muttering sour nothings to himself.
Another wistful look came into his tired old eyes.
Arthur blinked at him.
Arthur shivered involuntarily as he seated himself next to the old man.
The strangeness of it, the silent bobbing movement of the craft as it soared into the night sky quite unsettled him.
He looked at the old man, his face illuminated by the dull glow of tiny lights on the instrument panel.
He paused.
Arthur practically choked.
The old man looked at him gravely.
The aircar sailed through the night.
Chapter 23 It is an important and popular fact that things are not always what they seem.
For instance, on the planet Earth, man had always assumed that he was more intelligent than dolphins because he had achieved so much - the wheel.
New York, wars and so on - whilst all the dolphins had ever done was muck about in the water having a good time.
But conversely, the dolphins had always believed that they were far more intelligent than man - for precisely the same reasons.
Curiously enough, the dolphins had long known of the impending destruction of the planet Earth and had made many attempts to alert mankind of the danger; but most of their communications were misinterpreted as amusing attempts to punch footballs or whistle for tidbits, so they eventually gave up and left the Earth by their own means shortly before the Vogons arrived.
In fact there was only one species on the planet more intelligent than dolphins, and they spent a lot of their time in behavioural research laboratories running round inside wheels and conducting frighteningly elegant and subtle experiments on man.
Chapter 24 Silently the aircar coasted through the cold darkness, a single soft glow of light that was utterly alone in the deep Magrathean night.
It sped swiftly.
Arthur's companion seemed sunk in his own thoughts, and when Arthur tried on a couple of occasions to engage him in conversation again he would simply reply by asking if he was comfortable enough, and then left it at that.
Arthur tried to gauge the speed at which they were travelling, but the blackness outside was absolute and he was denied any reference points.
The sense of motion was so soft and slight he could almost believe they were hardly moving at all.
Then a tiny glow of light appeared in the far distance and within seconds had grown so much in size that Arthur realized it was travelling towards them at a colossal speed, and he tried to make out what sort of craft it might be.
He peered at it, but was unable to discern any clear shape, and suddenly gasped in alarm as the aircraft dipped sharply and headed downwards in what seemed certain to be a collision course.
Their relative velocity seemed unbelievable, and Arthur had hardly time to draw breath before it was all over.
The next thing he was aware of was an insane silver blur that seemed to surround him.
He twisted his head sharply round and saw a small black point dwindling rapidly in the distance behind them, and it took him several seconds to realize what had happened.
They had plunged into a tunnel in the ground.
The colossal speed had been their own relative to the glow of light which was a stationary hole in the ground, the mouth of the tunnel.
The insane blur of silver was the circular wall of the tunnel down which they were shooting, apparently at several hundred miles an hour.
He closed his eyes in terror.
After a length of time which he made no attempt to judge, he sensed a slight subsidence in their speed and some while later became aware that they were gradually gliding to a gentle halt.
He opened his eyes again.
They were still in the silver tunnel, threading and weaving their way through what appeared to be a crisscross warren of converging tunnels.
When they finally stopped it was in a small chamber of curved steel.
Several tunnels also had their terminus here, and at the farther end of the chamber Arthur could see a large circle of dim irritating light.
It was irritating because it played tricks with the eyes, it was impossible to focus on it properly or tell how near or far it was.
Slartibartfast turned and regarded Arthur with his solemn old eyes.
It is a little too... large.
We are about to pass through a gateway into a vast tract of hyperspace.
Arthur made nervous noises.
Slartibartfast touched a button and added, not entirely reassuringly.
The car shot forward straight into the circle of light, and suddenly Arthur had a fairly clear idea of what infinity looked like.
It wasn't infinity in fact.
Infinity itself looks flat and uninteresting.
Looking up into the night sky is looking into infinity - distance is incomprehensible and therefore meaningless.
The chamber into which the aircar emerged was anything but infinite, it was just very very big, so that it gave the impression of infinity far better than infinity itself.
Arthur's senses bobbed and span, as, travelling at the immense speed he knew the aircar attained, they climbed slowly through the open air leaving the gateway through which they had passed an invisible pinprick in the shimmering wall behind them.
The wall.
The wall defied the imagination - seduced it and defeated it.
The wall was so paralysingly vast and sheer that its top, bottom and sides passed away beyond the reach of sight.
The mere shock of vertigo could kill a man.
The wall appeared perfectly flat.
It would take the finest laser measuring equipment to detect that as it climbed, apparently to infinity, as it dropped dizzily away, as it planed out to either side, it also curved.
It met itself again thirteen light seconds away.
In other words the wall formed the inside of a hollow sphere, a sphere over three million miles across and flooded with unimaginable light.
Arthur stared about him in a kind of wonderful horror.
Ranged away before them, at distances he could neither judge nor even guess at, were a series of curious suspensions, delicate traceries of metal and light hung about shadowy spherical shapes that hung in the space.
No, we've been awakened to perform just one extraordinary commission for very... special clients from another dimension.
Arthur followed the old man's finger, till he was able to pick out the floating structure he was pointing out.
It was indeed the only one of the many structures that betrayed any sign of activity about it, though this was more a sublimal impression than anything one could put one's finger on.
At the moment however a flash of light arced through the structure and revealed in stark relief the patterns that were formed on the dark sphere within.
Patterns that Arthur knew, rough blobby shapes that were as familiar to him as the shapes of words, part of the furniture of his mind.
For a few seconds he sat in stunned silence as the images rushed around his mind and tried to find somewhere to settle down and make sense.
Part of his brain told him that he knew perfectly well what he was looking at and what the shapes represented whilst another quite sensibly refused to countenance the idea and abdicated responsibility for any further thinking in that direction.
The flash came again, and this time there could be no doubt.
There was a pause.
Won an award you know.
Lovely crinkly edges.
Five minutes later and it wouldn't have mattered so much.
For a while the aircar flew on in awkward silence.
Then the old man tried patiently to explain.
Only one word registered with Arthur.
Slartibartfast coughed politely.
Remember I have been asleep inside this planet of Magrathea for five million years and know little of these early sixties sit corns of which you speak.
These creatures you call mice, you see, they are not quite as they appear.
They are merely the protrusion into our dimension of vast hyperintelligent pan-dimensional beings.
The old man paused, and with a sympathetic frown continued.
Arthur thought about this for a second, and then his face cleared.
No, look you see, what happened was that we used to do experiments on them.
They were often used in behavioural research, Pavlov and all that sort of stuff.
So what happened was hat the mice would be set all sorts of tests, learning to ring bells, run around mazes and things so that the whole nature of the learning process could be examined.
Arthur's voice tailed off.
He paused for effect.
Your planet and people have formed the matrix of an organic computer running a ten-million-year research programme...
Chapter 25 There are of course many problems connected with life, of which some of the most popular are Why are people born?
Why do they die?
Why do they want to spend so much of the intervening time wearing digital watches?
And to this end they built themselves a stupendous super computer which was so amazingly intelligent that even before the data banks had been connected up it had started from I think therefore I am and got as far as the existence of rice pudding and income tax before anyone managed to turn it off.
It was the size of a small city.
Its main console was installed in a specially designed executive office, mounted on an enormous executive desk of finest ultramahagony topped with rich ultrared leather.
The dark carpeting was discreetly sumptuous, exotic pot plants and tastefully engraved prints of the principal computer programmers and their families were deployed liberally about the room, and stately windows looked out upon a tree-lined public square.
On the day of the Great On-Turning two soberly dressed programmers with brief cases arrived and were shown discreetly into the office.
They were aware that this day they would represent their entire race in its greatest moment, but they conducted themselves calmly and quietly as they seated themselves deferentially before the desk, opened their brief cases and took out their leather-bound notebooks.
Their names were Lunkwill and Fook.
For a few moments they sat in respectful silence, then, after exchanging a quiet glance with Fook, Lunkwill leaned forward and touched a small black panel.
The subtlest of hums indicated that the massive computer was now in total active mode.
After a pause it spoke to them in a voice rich resonant and deep.
Lunkwill and Fook glanced at each other in surprise.
Another worried look passed between the two programmers.
Lunkwill cleared his throat.
The two programmers sat in uncomfortable silence for a moment.
Then Lunkwill leaned forward again.
You're surely not thinking of the Multicorticoid Perspicutron Titan Muller are you?
Or the Pondermatic?
Contemptuous lights flashed across the computer's console.
Fook was losing patience.
Fook sighed heavily and glanced across to Lunkwill.
Lunkwill motioned him to wait.
Ask what else of me you will that I may function.
They shrugged at each other.
Fook composed himself.
Deep Thought paused for a moment's reflection.
Again, a significant pause.
There is an answer.
A sudden commotion destroyed the moment: the door flew open and two angry men wearing the coarse faded - blue robes and belts of the Cruxwan University burst into the room, thrusting aside the ineffectual flunkies who tried to bar their way.
He pushed a junior programmer back through the door.
Majikthise turned on Vroomfondel.
What we demand is a total absence of solid facts.
You want to check your legal position you do mate.
Under law the Quest for Ultimate Truth is quite clearly the inalienable prerogative of your working thinkers.
Any bloody machine goes and actually finds it and we're straight out of a job aren't we?
Suddenly a stentorian voice boomed across the room.
The hum level in the room suddenly increased as several ancillary bass driver units, mounted in sedately carved and varnished cabinet speakers around the room, cut in to give Deep Thought's voice a little more power.
Fook glanced impatiently at his watch.
Lunkwill and Fook blinked at each other.
And it occurs to me that running a programme like this is bound to create an enormous amount of popular publicity for the whole area of philosophy in general.
Everyone's going to have their own theories about what answer I'm eventually to come up with, and who better to capitalize on that media market than you yourself?
So long as you can keep disagreeing with each other violently enough and slagging each other off in the popular press, you can keep yourself on the gravy train for life.
The two philosophers gaped at him.
So saying, they turned on their heels and walked out of the door and into a lifestyle beyond their wildest dreams.
That is unless you would care to take a quick stroll on the surface of New Earth.
Chapter 27 Slartibartfast's study was a total mess, like the results of an explosion in a public library.
The old man frowned as they stepped in.
When we tried to revive our cleaning staff we discovered they'd been dead for nearly thirty thousand years.
Who's going to clear away the bodies, that's what I want to know.
He gestured Arthur towards a chair which looked as if it had been made out of the rib cage of a stegosaurus.
The instant he took hold of them a bird flew straight through him.
He was suspended in mid-air and totally invisible to himself.
Beneath him was a pretty treelined city square, and all around it as far as the eye could see were white concrete buildings of airy spacious design but somewhat the worse for wear - many were cracked and stained with rain.
Today however the sun was shining, a fresh breeze danced lightly through the trees, and the odd sensation that all the buildings were quietly humming was probably caused by the fact that the square and all the streets around it were thronged with cheerful excited people.
Somewhere a band was playing, brightly coloured flags were fluttering in the breeze and the spirit of carnival was in the air.
Arthur felt extraordinarily lonely stuck up in the air above it all without so much as a body to his name, but before he had time to reflect on this a voice rang out across the square and called for everyone's attention.
A man standing on a brightly dressed dais before the building which clearly dominated the square was addressing the crowd over a Tannoy.
Wild cheers broke out amongst the crowd.
Flags, streamers and wolf whistles sailed through the air.
The narrower streets looked rather like centipedes rolled over on their backs and frantically waving their legs in the air.
Hurrahs burst from the ecstatic crowd.
What is my purpose in life?
Does it really, cosmically speaking, matter if I don't get up and go to work?
As the crowd erupted once again, Arthur found himself gliding through the air and down towards one of the large stately windows on the first floor of the building behind the dais from which the speaker was addressing the crowd.
He experienced a moment's panic as he sailed straight through towards the window, which passed when a second or so later he found he had gone right through the solid glass without apparently touching it.
No one in the room remarked on his peculiar arrival, which is hardly surprising as he wasn't there.
He began to realize that the whole experience was merely a recorded projection which knocked six-track seventy-millimetre into a cocked hat.
The room was much as Slartibartfast had described it.
In seven and a half million years it had been well looked after and cleaned regularly every century or so.
The ultramahagony desk was worn at the edges, the carpet a little faded now, but the large computer terminal sat in sparkling glory on the desk's leather top, as bright as if it had been constructed yesterday.
Two severely dressed men sat respectfully before the terminal and waited.
The word was Loonquawl, and it flashed a couple of times and the disappeared again.
Before Arthur was able to assimilate this the other man spoke and the word Phouchg appeared by his neck.
There was a moment's expectant pause whilst panels slowly came to life on the front of the console.
Lights flashed on and off experimentally and settled down into a businesslike pattern.
A soft low hum came from the communication channel.
The two men shivered with expectancy.
Their waiting had not been in vain.
Both of the men had been trained for this moment, their lives had been a preparation for it, they had been selected at birth as those who would witness the answer, but even so they found themselves gasping and squirming like excited children.
They both licked their dry lips.
The two men fidgeted.
The tension was unbearable.
Chapter 28 It was a long time before anyone spoke.
Out of the corner of his eye Phouchg could see the sea of tense expectant faces down in the square outside.
A slow stupefied silence crept over the men as they stared at the computer and then at each other.
Deep Thought pondered this for a moment.
Deep Thought pondered this for another long moment.
Both men collapsed on to their chairs in despair.
They both looked up sharply.
Suddenly Arthur began to feel his apparently non-existent scalp begin to crawl as he found himself moving slowly but inexorably forward towards the console, but it was only a dramatic zoom on the part of whoever had made the recording he assumed.
A computer which can calculate the Question to the Ultimate Answer, a computer of such infinite and subtle complexity that organic life itself shall form part of its operational matrix.
And you yourselves shall take on new forms and go down into the computer to navigate its ten-million-year program!
Yes!
I shall design this computer for you.
And I shall name it also unto you.
And it shall be called...
Phouchg gaped at Deep Thought.
Loonquawl too suddenly sustained horrific gashed from nowhere.
The Computer console blotched and cracked, the walls flickered and crumbled and the room crashed upwards into its own ceiling...
Slartibartfast was standing in front of Arthur holding the two wires.
So what's the point?
Zaphod curled himself up.
What's the matter with the ground?
With an amazingly balletic movement Zaphod was standing and scanning the horizon, because that was how far the gold ground stretched in every direction, perfectly smooth and solid.
It gleamed like... it's impossible to say what it gleamed like because nothing in the Universe gleams in quite the same way that a planet of solid gold does.
He poked it and prodded it with his fingernail.
It was very heavy and very slightly soft - he could mark it with his fingernail.
It was very yellow and very shiny, and when he breathed on it his breath evaporated off it in that very peculiar and special way that breath evaporates off solid gold.
Zaphod stared at him bitterly.
He sat down in a huff.
Bit dull.
Seas of light glared at them in one solid blaze wherever they looked.
In the sky a huge green catalogue number appeared.
It flickered and changed, and when they looked around again so had the land.
The sea was purple.
The beach they were on was composed of tiny yellow and green pebbles - presumably terribly precious stones.
The mountains in the distance seemed soft and undulating with red peaks.
Nearby stood a solid silver beach table with a frilly mauve parasol and silver tassles.
In the sky a huge sign appeared, replacing the catalogue number.
It said, Whatever your tastes, Magrathea can cater for you.
We are not proud.
And five hundred entirely naked women dropped out of the sky on parachutes.
In a moment the scene vanished and left them in a springtime meadow full of cows.
And I did it in such a way that it wouldn't be detected by the government screening tests.
And I wasn't to know anything about it myself.
The other two nodded in agreement.
And the answer is I don't know.
Obviously.
But I put a few things together and I can begin to guess.
When did I decide to run for President?
Shortly after the death of President Yooden Vranx.
Fie was a gas.
Fie gave us conkers when you bust your way into his megafreighter.
The Arcturan megafreighters used to carry most of the bulky trade between the Galactic Centre and the outlying regions The Betelgeuse trading scouts used to find the markets and the Arcturans would supply them.
There was a lot of trouble with space pirates before they were wiped out in the Dordellis wars, and the megafreighters had to be equipped with the most fantastic defence shields known to Galactic science.
They were real brutes of ships, and huge.
In orbit round a planet they would eclipse the sun.
On a tri-jet scooter designed for stratosphere work, a mere kid.
I mean forget it, it was crazier than a mad monkey.
I went along for the ride because I'd got some very safe money on him not doing it, and didn't want him coming back with fake evidence.
So what happens?
We got in his tri jet which he had souped up into something totally other, crossed three parsecs in a matter of weeks, bust our way into a megafreighter I still don't know how, marched on to the bridge waving toy pistols and demanded conkers.
A wilder thing I have not known.
Lost me a year's pocket money.
For what?
Then he teleported us back.
Into the maximum security wing of Betelgeuse state prison.
He was a cool guy.
Zaphod paused.
The scene around them was currently plunged into gloom.
Dark mists swirled round them and elephantine shapes lurked indistinctly in the shadows.
The air was occasionally rent with the sounds of illusory beings murdering other illusory beings.
Presumably enough people must have liked this sort of thing to make it a paying proposition.
Ford gaped at him in astonishment for a moment, and then roared with laughter.
Zaphod shrugged.
Zaphod thought hard about this and doubts seemed to cross his minds.
A moment later, the last planet in the catalogue vanished from beneath them and the solid world resolved itself again.
They were sitting in a plush waiting room full of glass-top tables and design awards.
A tall Magrathean man was standing in front of them.
He picked up a paper from the top of a pile, but then couldn't think of anywhere else to put it, so he but it back on top of the original pile which promptly fell over.
Ten million years, Earthman... can you conceive of that kind of time span?
A galactic civilization could grow from a single worm five times over in that time.
He paused.
Look at me: I design coastlines.
He rummaged around in a pile of debris and pulled out a large perspex block with his name on it and a model of Norway moulded into it.
I've been doing fjords in all my life.
He turned it over in his hands with a shrug and tossed it aside carelessly, but not so carelessly that it didn't land on something soft.
And they tell me it's not equatorial enough.
He gave a hollow laugh.
Somewhere on the wall a small white light flashed.
Your arrival on the planet has caused considerable excitement.
He opened the door and stood waiting for Arthur to follow.
Arthur glanced around him once more, and then down at himself, at the sweaty dishevelled clothes he had been lying in the mud in on Thursday morning.
Chapter 31 It is of course well known that careless talk costs lives, but the full scale of the problem is not always appreciated.
The two opposing leaders were meeting for the last time.
A dreadful silence fell across the conference table as the commander of the Vl'hurgs, resplendent in his black jewelled battle shorts, gazed levelly at the G'Gugvuntt leader squatting opposite him in a cloud of green sweet-smelling steam, and, with a million sleek and horribly beweaponed star cruisers poised to unleash electric death at his single word of command, challenged the vile creature to take back what it had said about his mother.
The creature stirred in his sickly broiling vapour, and at that very moment the words I seem to be having tremendous difficulty with my lifestyle drifted across the conference table.
Unfortunately, in the Vl'hurg tongue this was the most dreadful insult imaginable, and there was nothing for it but to wage terrible war for centuries.
Eventually of course, after their Galaxy had been decimated over a few thousand years, it was realized that the whole thing had been a ghastly mistake, and so the two opposing battle fleets settled their few remaining differences in order to launch a joint attack on our own Galaxy - now positively identified as the source of the offending remark.
For thousands more years the mighty ships tore across the empty wastes of space and finally dived screaming on to the first planet they came across - which happened to be the Earth - where due to a terrible miscalculation of scale the entire battle fleet was accidentally swallowed by a small dog.
Those who study the complex interplay of cause and effect in the history of the Universe say that this sort of thing is going on all the time, but that we are powerless to prevent it.
A short aircar trip brought Arthur and the old Magrathean to a doorway.
They left the car and went through the door into a waiting room full of glass-topped tables and perspex awards.
Almost immediately, a light flashed above the door at the other side of the room and they entered.
The lighting was rather subdued and it took him a moment or so to see Ford, Trillian and Zaphod sitting round a large table beautifully decked out with exotic dishes, strange sweetmeats and bizarre fruits.
They were stuffing their faces.
Arthur glanced around and suddenly yelped.
There was an awkward silence as everyone looked pointedly at Arthur.
He was busy staring at two white mice sitting in what looked like whisky glasses on the table.
He heard the silence and glanced around at everyone.
His whiskers stroked what must have been a touch sensitive panel on the inside of the whisky-glass like affair, and it moved forward slightly.
Arthur gaped.
She looked him in the eye and Arthur thought he detected the tiniest resigned shrug.
Slartibartfast coughed politely.
He swivelled his pink little eyes.
Elegantly sculptured contours, soaring pinnacles of ice, deep majestic ravines!
With a brief nod to the rest of the company he turned and walked sadly out of the room.
Arthur stared after him not knowing what to say.
Ford and Zaphod clinked their glasses together.
Ford looked round.
The two mice scuttled impatiently around in their glass transports.
Finally they composed themselves, and Benji moved forward to address Arthur.
Why?
And this is more or less the point - we're sick to the teeth with the whole thing, and the prospect of doing it all over again on account of those whinnet-ridden Vogons quite frankly gives me the screaming heeby jeebies, you know what I mean?
Arthur glanced at them, wondering what all this was leading up to.
Zaphod leaned forward to Arthur.
The mice bristled.
He wasn't aware of ever having felt an organic part of anything.
He had always seen this as one of his problems.
Ford made for the door.
With a tiny whining shriek their two glass transports lifted themselves off the table, and swung through the air towards Arthur, who stumbled further backwards into a blind corner, utterly unable to cope or think of anything.
Trillian grabbed him desperately by the arm and tried to drag him towards the door, which Ford and Zaphod were struggling to open, but Arthur was dead weight - he seemed hypnotized by the airborne rodents swooping towards him.
She screamed at him, but he just gaped.
With one more yank.
Ford and Zaphod got the door open.
On the other side of it was a small pack of rather ugly men who they could only assume were the heavy mob of Magrathea.
Not only were they ugly themselves, but the medical equipment they carried with them was also far from pretty.
They charged.
So - Arthur was about to have his head cut open, Trillian was unable to help him, and Ford and Zaphod were about to be set upon by several thugs a great deal heavier and more sharply armed than they were.
All in all it was extremely fortunate that at that moment every alarm on the planet burst into an earsplitting din.
Armed intruders in section 8A.
The two mice sniffed irritably round the fragments of their glass transports where they lay shattered on the floor.
He scuttled round and about, his pink eyes flashing, his fine white coat bristling with static.
He thought.
Benji considered this for a moment.
They sank into silence for a few seconds.
Again they thought.
He rolled the phrase around a little.
Sounds very significant without actually tying you down to meaning anything at all.
How many roads must a man walk down?
Forty-two.
They performed a scampering dance in their excitement.
Near them on the floor lay several rather ugly men who had been hit about the head with some heavy design awards.
Half a mile away, four figures pounded up a corridor looking for a way out.
They emerged into a wide open-plan computer bay.
They glanced about wildly.
As the others started after him he was brought up short by a Kill-O-Zap energy bolt that cracked through the air inches in front of him and fried a small section of adjacent wall.
At the end of the gangway appeared a heavily armoured and space-suited figure waving a vicious Kill-O-Zap gun.
The others swerved in behind him.
They squeezed themselves down in an angle between a large computer data bank and the wall.
They held their breath and waited.
Suddenly the air exploded with energy bolts as both the cops opened fire on them simultaneously.
Zaphod stuck a head up for a dangerous moment.
They waited.
Another pause, and then the loud hailer again.
I don't go around gratuitously shooting people and then bragging about it afterwards in seedy space-rangers bars, like some cops I could mention!
Ford's eyes popped halfway out of their sockets.
A millisecond later the air about them started to fry again, as bolt after bolt of Kill-O-Zap hurled itself into the computer bank in front of them.
The fusillade continued for several seconds at unbearable intensity.
When it stopped, there were a few seconds of near quietness ad the echoes died away.
They let fly another electric barrage.
The heat and noise was quite fantastic.
Slowly, the computer bank was beginning to disintegrate.
The front had almost all melted away, and thick rivulets of molten metal were winding their way back towards where they were squatting.
They huddled further back and waited for the end.
Chapter 33 But the end never came, at least not then.
Quite suddenly the barrage stopped, and the sudden silence afterwards was punctuated by a couple of strangled gurgles and thuds.
The four stared at each other.
They waited.
No answer.
They waited for a few more seconds.
He glanced round at the others.
They all shook their heads.
For a moment, nothing happened.
Then, after a second or so, nothing continued to happen.
Ford peered through the thick smoke that was billowing out of the burning computer.
Cautiously he stepped out into the open.
Still nothing happened.
Twenty yards away he could dimly see through the smoke the space-suited figure of one of the cops.
He was lying in a crumpled heap on the ground.
Twenty yards in the other direction lay the second man.
No one else was anywhere to be seen.
This struck Ford as being extremely odd.
Slowly, nervously, he walked towards the first one.
The body lay reassuringly still as he approached it, and continued to lie reassuringly still as he reached it and put his foot down on the Kill-O-Zap gun that still dangled from its limp fingers.
He reached down and picked it up, meeting no resistance.
The cop was quite clearly dead.
A quick examination revealed him to be from Blagulon Kappa - he was a methane-breathing life form, dependent on his space suit for survival in the thin oxygen atmosphere of Magrathea.
The tiny life-support system computer on his backpack appeared unexpectedly to have blown up.
Ford poked around in it in considerable astonishment.
These miniature suit computers usually had the full back-up of the main computer back on the ship, with which they were directly linked through the sub-etha.
Such a system was fail-safe in all circumstances other than total feedback malfunction, which was unheard of.
He hurried over to the other prone figure, and discovered that exactly the same impossible thing had happened to him, presumably simultaneously.
He called the others over to look.
They came, shared his astonishment, but not his curiosity.
He grabbed the second Kill-O-Zap gun, blasted a perfectly harmless accounting computer and rushed out into the corridor, followed by the others.
He very nearly blasted hell out of an aircar that stood waiting for them a few yards away.
The aircar was empty, but Arthur recognized it as belonging to Slartibartfast.
It had a note from him pinned to part of its sparse instrument panel.
The note had an arrow drawn on it, pointing at one of the controls.
It said, This is probably the best button to press.
Chapter 34 The aircar rocketed them at speeds in excess of R17 through the steel tunnels that lead out onto the appalling surface of the planet which was now in the grip of yet another drear morning twilight.
Ghastly grey lights congealed on the land.
R is a velocity measure, defined as a reasonable speed of travel that is consistent with health, mental wellbeing and not being more than say five minutes late.
It is therefore clearly an almost infinitely variable figure according to circumstances, since the first two factors vary not only with speed taken as an absolute, but also with awareness of the third factor.
Unless handled with tranquility this equation can result in considerable stress, ulcers and even death.
R17 is not a fixed velocity, but it is clearly far too fast.
The aircar flung itself through the air at R17 and above, deposited them next to the Heart of Gold which stood starkly on the frozen ground like a bleached bone, and then precipitately hurled itself back in the direction whence they had come, presumably on important business of its own.
Shivering, the four of them stood and looked at the ship.
Beside it stood another one.
It was the Blagulon Kappa policecraft, a bulbous sharklike affair, slate green in colour and smothered with black stencilled letters of varying degrees of size and unfriendliness.
The letters informed anyone who cared to read them as to where the ship was from, what section of the police it was assigned to, and where the power feeds should be connected.
It seemed somehow unnaturally dark and silent, even for a ship whose two-man crew was at that moment lying asphyxicated in a smoke-filled chamber several miles beneath the ground.
It is one of those curious things that is impossible to explain or define, but one can sense when a ship is completely dead.
Ford could sense it and found it most mysterious - a ship and two policemen seemed to have gone spontaneously dead.
In his experience the Universe simply didn't work like that.
The other three could sense it too, but they could sense the bitter cold even more and hurried back into the Heart of Gold suffering from an acute attack of no curiosity.
Ford stayed, and went to examine the Blagulon ship.
As he walked, he nearly tripped over an inert steel figure lying face down in the cold dust.
It's part of the shape of the Universe.
I only have to talk to somebody and they begin to hate me.
Even robots hate me.
He jacked himself up to his feet and stood resolutely facing the opposite direction.
I got very bored and depressed, so I went and plugged myself in to its external computer feed.
Chapter 35 That night, as the Heart of Gold was busy putting a few light years between itself and the Horsehead Nebula, Zaphod lounged under the small palm tree on the bridge trying to bang his brain into shape with massive Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters; Ford and Trillian sat in a corner discussing life and matters arising from it; and Arthur took to his bed to flip through Ford's copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
Since he was going to live in the place, he reasoned, he'd better start finding out something about it.
He came across this entry.
He got no further before the ship's intercom buzzed into life.
DOUGLAS ADAMS THE RESTAURANT AT THE END OF THE UNIVERSE To Jane and James with many thanks to Geoffrey Perkins for achieving the Improbable to Paddy Kingsland, Lisa Braun and Alick Hale Munro for helping him to John Lloyd for his help with the original Milliways script to Simon Brett for starting the whole thing off to the Paul Simon album One Trick Pony which I played incessantly while writing this book.
Five years is far too long And with very special thanks to Jacqui Graham for infinite patience, kindness and food in adversity There is a theory which states that if ever anyone discovers exactly what the Universe is for and why it is here, it will instantly disappear and be replaced by something even more bizarre and inexplicable.
There is another theory which states that this has already happened.
Chapter 1 The story so far: In the beginning the Universe was created.
This has made a lot of people very angry and been widely regarded as a bad move.
Many races believe that it was created by some sort of God, though the Jatravartid people of Viltvodle VI believe that the entire Universe was in fact sneezed out of the nose of a being called the Great Green Arkleseizure.
The Jatravartids, who live in perpetual fear of the time they call The Coming of The Great White Handkerchief, are small blue creatures with more than fifty arms each, who are therefore unique in being the only race in history to have invented the aerosol deodorant before the wheel.
However, the Great Green Arkleseizure Theory is not widely accepted outside Viltvodle VI and so, the Universe being the puzzling place it is, other explanations are constantly being sought.
For instance, a race of hyperintelligent pan-dimensional beings once built themselves a gigantic supercomputer called Deep Thought to calculate once and for all the Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe, and Everything.
For seven and a half million years, Deep Thought computed and calculated, and in the end announced that the answer was in fact Forty-two-and so another, even bigger, computer had to be built to find out what the actual question was.
And this computer, which was called the Earth, was so large that it was frequently mistaken for a planet - especially by the strange ape like beings who roamed its surface, totally unaware that they were simply part of a gigantic computer program.
And this is very odd, because without that fairly simple and obvious piece of knowledge, nothing that ever happened on the Earth could possibly make the slightest bit of sense.
Sadly however, just before the critical moment of readout, the Earth was unexpectedly demolished by the Vogons to make way - so they claimed - for a new hyperspace bypass, and so all hope of discovering a meaning for life was lost for ever.
Or so it would seem.
Two of there strange, ape-like creatures survived.
Arthur Dent escaped at the very last moment because an old friend of his, Ford Prefect, suddenly turned out to be from a small planet in the vicinity of Betelgeuse and not from Guildford as he had hitherto claimed; and, more to the point, he knew how to hitch rides on flying saucers.
Tricia McMillian - or Trillian - had skipped the planet six months earlier with Zaphod Beeblebrox, the then President of the Galaxy.
Two survivors.
They are all that remains of the greatest experiment ever conducted - to find the Ultimate Question and the Ultimate Answer of Life, the Universe, and Everything.
And, less than half a million miles from where their starship is drifting lazily through the inky blackness of space, a Vogon ship is moving slowly towards them.
Chapter 2 Like all Vogon ships it looked as if it had been not so much designed as congealed.
The unpleasant yellow lumps and edifices which protuded from it at unsightly angles would have disfigured the looks of most ships, but in this case that was sadly impossible.
Uglier things have been spotted in the skies, but not by reliable witnesses.
In fact to see anything much uglier than a Vogon ship you would have to go inside and look at a Vogon.
In fact, the average Vogon probably wouldn't even think once.
They are simple-minded, thick-willed, slug-brained creatures, and thinking is not really something they are cut out for.
Anatomical analysis of the Vogon reveals that its brain was originally a badly deformed, misplaced and dyspeptic liver.
The fairest thing you can say about them, then, is that they know what they like, and what they like generally involves hurting people and, wherever possible, getting very angry.
One thing they don't like is leaving a job unfinished - particularly this Vogon, and particularly - for various reasons - this job.
He heaved his monumentally vile body round in his ill-fitting, slimy seat and stared at the monitor screen on which the starship Heart of Gold was being systematically scanned.
It mattered little to him that the Heart of Gold, with its Infinite Improbability Drive, was the most beautiful and revolutionary ship ever built.
Aesthetics and technology were closed books to him and, had he had his way, burnt and buried books as well.
It mattered even less to him that Zaphod Beeblebrox was aboard.
Zaphod Beeblebrox was now the ex-President of the Galaxy, and though every police force in the Galaxy was currently pursuing both him and this ship he had stolen, the Vogon was not interested.
He had other fish to fry.
It has been said that Vogons are not above a little bribery and corruption in the same way that the sea is not above the clouds, and this was certainly true in his case.
In seeking so implacably the destruction of the Earth and all that therein lay he was moving somewhat above and beyond the call of his professional duty.
There was even some doubt as to whether the said bypass was actually going to be built, but the matter had been glossed over.
He grunted a repellent grunt of satisfaction.
Within a few seconds the face of Gag Halfrunt appeared on the screen, smiling the smile of a man who knew he was ten light years away from the Vogon face he was looking at.
Mixed up somewhere in the smile was a glint of irony too.
He was paying him an awful lot of money to do some very dirty work.
As one of the Galaxy's most prominent and successful psychiatrists, he and a consortium of his colleagues were quite prepared to spend an awful lot of money when it seemed that the entire future of psychiatry might be at stake.
The Vogon captain told him that in the last few hours he had wiped out nearly half his crew in a disciplinary exercise.
Halfrunt's smile did not flicker for an instant.
Good.
We are clearly both very well adjusted in our mental attitudes today.
For an instant Halfrunt's smile flickered.
He paused.
His mouth continued to smile, but his eyes frowned slightly.
He toyed with this thought a little before reluctantly dismissing it.
He vanished from the screen.
The Vogon Captain pressed a communicator button which connected him with the remains of his crew.
At that precise moment Zaphod Beeblebrox was in his cabin swearing very loudly.
Two hours ago, he had said that they would go for a quick bite at the Restaurant at the End of the Universe, whereupon he had had a blazing row with the ship's computer and stormed off to his cabin shouting that he would work out the Improbability factors with a pencil.
The Heart of Gold's Improbability Drive made it the most powerful and unpredictable ship in existence.
There was nothing it couldn't do, provided you knew exactly how improbable it was that the thing you wanted it to do would ever happen.
He had stolen it when, as President, he was meant to be launching it.
He didn't know exactly why he had stolen it, except that he liked it.
He didn't know why he had become President of the Galaxy, except that it seemed a fun thing to be.
He did know that there were better reasons than these, but that they were buried in a dark, locked off section of his two brains.
He wished the dark, locked off section of his two brains would go away because they occasionally surfaced momentarily and put strange thoughts into the light, fun sections of his mind and tried to deflect him from what he saw as being the basic business of his life, which was to have a wonderfully good time.
At the moment he was not having a wonderfully good time.
He had run out of patience and pencils and was feeling very hungry.
At that same precise moment.
Ford Prefect was in mid air.
This was not because of anything wrong with the ship's artificial gravity field, but because he was leaping down the stair-well which led to the ship's personal cabins.
It was a very high jump to do in one bound and he landed awkwardly, stumbled, recovered, raced down the corridor sending a couple of miniature service robots flying, skidded round the corner, burst into Zaphod's door and explained what was on his mind.
A short while before this, Arthur Dent had set out from his cabin in search of a cup of tea.
It was not a quest he embarked upon with a great deal of optimism., because he knew that the only source of hot drinks on the entire ship was a benighted piece of equipment produced by the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation.
It was called a Nutri- Matic Drinks Synthesizer, and he had encountered it before.
It claimed to produce the widest possible range of drinks personally matched to the tastes and metabolism of whoever cared to use it.
When put to the test, however, it invariably produced a plastic cup filled with a liquid that was almost, but nit quite, entirely unlike tea.
He attempted to reason with the thing.
He threw it away.
The motto stands - or rather stood - in three mile high illuminated letters near the Complaints Department spaceport on Eadrax.
Unfortunately its weight was such that shortly after it was erected, the ground beneath the letters caved in and they dropped for nearly half their length through the offices of many talented young complaints executives - now deceased.
Arthur threw away a sixth cup of the liquid.
Will you try to comprehend what I'm telling you?
Arthur decided to give up.
Then he decided he'd be dammed if he'd give up.
You are going to make one for me.
And he sat.
He told the Nutri-Matic about India, he told it about China, he told it about Ceylon.
He told it about broad leaves drying in the sun.
He told it about silver teapots.
He told it about summer afternoons on the lawn.
He told it about putting in the milk before the tea so it wouldn't get scalded.
All the cheerful burbling had dropped out of its voice and it now meant business.
It summoned up the ship's computer.
The Nutri-Matic explained about tea to the ship's computer.
The computer boggled, linked logic circuits with the Nutri-Matic and together they lapsed into a grim silence.
Arthur watched and waited for a while, but nothing further happened.
He thumped it, but still nothing happened.
Eventually he gave up and wandered up to the bridge.
In the empty wastes of space, the Heart of Gold hung still.
Around it blazed the billion pinpricks of the Galaxy.
Towards it crept the ugly yellow lump of the Vogon ship.
Arthur asked as he walked on to the bridge, and instantly began to wonder why Trillian was yelling at the computer to talk to her.
Ford was thumping it and Zaphod was kicking it, and also why there was a nasty yellow lump on the vision screen.
He put down the empty cup he was carrying and walked over to them.
At that moment Zaphod flung himself over to the polished marble surfaces that contained the instruments that controlled the conventional photon drive.
They materialized beneath his hands and he flipped over to manual control.
He pushed, he pulled, he pressed and he swore.
The photon drive gave a sickly judder and cut out again.
The Improbability Drive gave two small whines and then also cut out.
Arthur gibbered.
Ford moved away from the computer terminal, wiped a sleeve across his forehead and slumped back against the wall.
He glared at nothing and bit his lip.
When Arthur had been a boy at school, long before the Earth had been demolished, he had used to play football.
He had not been at all good at it, and his particular speciality had been scoring own goals in important matches.
Whenever this happened he used to experience a peculiar tingling round the back of his neck that would slowly creep up across his cheeks and heat his brow.
The image of mud and grass and lots of little jeering boys flinging it at him suddenly came vividly to his mind at this moment.
A peculiar tingling sensation at the back of his neck was creeping up across his cheeks and heating his brow.
He started to speak, and stopped.
He started to speak again and stopped again.
Finally he managed to speak.
He cleared his throat.
He glanced at the approaching yellow blob on the vision screen.
Their eyes were riveted on him.
Zaphod put out a hand and held Arthur by the scruff of the neck.
It lapsed back into a silence that was only matched for sheer intensity by the silence of the three people staring at Arthur Dent.
As if to relieve the tension, the Vogons chose that moment to start firing.
The ship shook, the ship thundered.
Outside, the inch thick force- shield around it blistered, crackled and spat under the barrage of a dozen 30-Megahurt Definit-Kil Photrazon Cannon, and looked as if it wouldn't be around for long.
Fie flicked idly at some useless switches, then gave Arthur an unfriendly look.
Aboard the Vogon ship, Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was puzzled.
Fie had expected a chase, he had expected an exciting grapple with tractor beams, he had expected to have to use the specially installed Sub- Cyclic Normality Assert-i-Tron to counter the Fleart of Gold's Infinite Improbability Drive, but the Sub-Cyclic Normality Assert-i-Tron lay idle as the Fleart of Gold just sat there and took it.
A dozen 30-Megahurt Definit-Kil Photrazon Cannon continued to blaze away at the Fleart of Gold, and still it just sat there and took it.
Fie tested every sensor at his disposal to see if there was any subtle trickery afoot, but no subtle trickery was to be found.
Fie didn't know about the tea of course.
Nor did he know exactly how the occupants of the Fleart of Gold were spending the last three minutes and thirty seconds of life they had left to spend.
Quite how Zaphod Beeblebrox arrived at the idea of holding a seance at this point is something he was never quite clear on.
Obviously the subject of death was in the air, but more as something to be avoided than harped upon.
Possibly the horror that Zaphod experienced at the prospect of being reunited with his deceased relatives led on to the thought that they might just feel the same way about him and, what's more, be able to do something about helping to postpone this reunion.
Or again it might just have been one of the strange promptings that occasionally surfaced from that dark area of his mind that he had inexplicably locked off prior to becoming President of the Galaxy.
The ship continued to shake and thunder.
The temperature was rising.
The light was getting dimmer - all the energy the computer didn't require for thinking about tea was being pumped into the rapidly fading force-field.
Now.
Come on!
They clustered round the central console in confusion, sat down and, feeling exceptionally foolish, held hands.
With his third hand Zaphod turned off the lights.
Darkness gripped the ship.
Outside, the thunderous roar of the Definit-Kil cannon continued to rip at the force-field.
Trillian said nothing.
What, she thought, was there to say?
The only light on the bridge came from two dim red triangles in a far corner where Marvin the Paranoid Android sat slumped, ignoring all and ignored by all, in a private and rather unpleasant world of his own.
Round the central console four figures hunched in tight concentration trying to blot from their minds the terrifying shuddering of the ship and the fearful roar that echoed through it.
They concentrated.
Still they concentrated.
And still they concentrated.
The seconds ticked by.
On Zaphod's brow stood beads of sweat, first of concentration, then of frustration and finally of embarrassment.
At last he let out a cry of anger, snatched back his hands from Trillian and Ford and stabbed at the light switch.
Four figures jolted upright in their seats.
Slowly they turned their heads to look, though their scalps showed a distinct propensity to try and stay in the same place.
His two small wispy-haired heads looked so ancient that it seemed they might hold dim memories of the birth of the galaxies themselves.
One lolled in sleep, but the other squinted sharply at them.
If his eyes weren't what they once were, they must once have been diamond cutters.
Zaphod stuttered nervously for a moment.
Fie gave the intricate little double nod which is the traditional Betelgeusian gesture of familial respect.
The little old figure moved closer towards them.
He peered through the dim light.
He thrust out a bony finger at his great grandson.
The last of our great line.
Zaphod hated his voice.
It always seemed to him to screech like fingernails across the blackboard of what he liked to think of as his soul.
He shifted awkwardly in his seat.
Never think of other people.
Zaphod fidgeted nervously.
Tell you what.
I'll go and see her.
Zaphod felt strangely powerless to take charge of this conversation, and Ford's heavy breathing at his side told him that the seconds were ticking away fast.
The noise and the shaking had reached terrifying proportions.
He saw Trillian and Arthur's faces white and unblinking in the gloom.
It was an exaggeration, but it was his only opportunity so far of getting the basic point of the exercise across.
The spectral ancestor nodded, picked up the cup Arthur Dent had brought in and looked at it with interest.
Zaphod didn't and found the information hard to concentrate on what with all the noise and the imminence of death and so on.
He slammed the cup down and pointed a quivering, stick-like see-through finger at Zaphod.
He stood amazed.
Too busy.
Too modern.
He shook his head - carefully, so as not to disturb the slumber of the other one, which was already becoming restive.
Zaphod Beeblebrox the Fourth peered at him curiously.
He grunted to himself.
Zaphod felt he was teetering on the edge of madness and wondered if he shouldn't just jump over and have done with it.
Only President you know!
Zaphod blinked in bewilderment.
The hunched up little figure stalked up to his great grandson and tapped him sternly on the knee.
This had the effect of reminding Zaphod that he was talking to a ghost because he didn't feel a thing.
You know because you've been it, and I know because I'm dead and it gives one such a wonderfully uncluttered perspective.
We have a saying up here.
Very deep.
Ford nodded despondently.
Of course I forgot!
I had to forget.
They screen your brain when you get the job you know.
Fie paused for a moment.
Fie looked again at his watch and tapped it.
Fie looked up.
A mischievous twinkle gleamed in the ghost's hard little eyes.
I don't know what this great think I'm meant to be doing is, and it looks to me as if I was supposed not to know.
And I resent that, right?
The old me cared.
Fine, so far so hoopy.
Except that the old me cared so much that he actually got inside his own brain - my own brain - and locked off the bits that knew and cared, because if I knew and cared I wouldn't be able to do it.
I wouldn't be able to go and be President, and I wouldn't be able to steal this ship, which must be the important thing.
OK, that was his choice.
This new me has its own choices to make, and by a strange coincidence those choices involve not knowing and not caring about this big number, whatever it is.
That's what he wanted, that's what he got.
Well, I don't want to know, and I don't want to hear them.
That's my choice.
Zaphod banged the console in fury, oblivious to the dumbfolded looks he was attracting.
He grinned at Trillian, weakly.
A cipher.
Somewhere in the shadows behind is another man, being, something, with ultimate power.
That man, or being, or something, you must find - the man who controls this Galaxy, and - we suspect - others.
The old ghost glowered at him.
You will simply take this ship, this Improbability Drive ship to where it is needed.
You will do it.
Don't think you can escape your purpose.
The Improbability Field controls you, you are in its grip.
He was standing tapping at one of the terminals of Eddie the Shipboard Computer.
Zaphod told him.
I think you will not be able to avoid it.
However, I am too long dead and too tired to care as much as I did.
The principal reason I am helping you now is that I couldn't bear the thought of you and your modern friends slouching about up here.
Within the space of one second, a bolt of light flashed from the wizened old ghost's hands to the computer, the ghost vanished, the bridge filled with billowing smoke and the Heart of Gold leapt an unknown distance through the dimensions of time and space.
Chapter 4 Ten light years away, Gag Halfrunt jacked up his smile by several notches.
As he watched the picture on his vision screen, relayed across the sub-ether from the bridge of the Vogon ship, he saw the final shreds of the Heart of Gold's force-shield ripped away, and the ship itself vanish in a puff of smoke.
Good, he thought.
The end of the last stray survivors of the demolition he had ordered on the planet Earth, he thought.
There would be some celebration with his fellows tonight, and in the morning they would meet again their unhappy, bewildered and highly profitable patients, secure in the knowledge that the Meaning of Life would not now be, once and for all, well and truly sorted out, he thought.
He paused, then looked about.
Arthur and Trillian looked about blankly.
They were pale and shaken and didn't know where Zaphod was.
The robot's corner was empty.
The ship was utterly silent.
It lay in thick black space.
Occasionally it rocked and swayed.
Every instrument was dead, every vision screen was dead.
They consulted the computer.
They turned off the light music.
They searched every corner of the ship in increasing bewilderment and alarm.
Everywhere was dead and silent.
Nowhere was there any trace of Zaphod or of Marvin.
One of the last areas they checked was the small bay in which the Nutri-Matic machine was located.
Not that there are any nights on Ursa Minor Beta.
It is a West Zone planet which by an inexplicable and somewhat suspicious freak of topography consists almost entirely of sub-tropical coastline.
By an equally suspicious freak of temporal relastatics, it is nearly always Saturday afternoon just before the beach bars close.
If you approach Light City by air - and there is no other way of approaching it, no roads, no port facilities - if you don't fly they don't want to see you in Light City - you will see why it has this name.
Here the sun shines brightest of all, glittering on the swimming pools, shimmering on the white, palm-lined boulevards, glistening on the healthy bronzed specks moving up and down them, gleaming off the villas, the hazy airpads, the beach bars and so on.
Most particularly it shines on a building, a tall beautiful building consisting of two thirty-storey white towers connected by a bridge half-way up their length.
The building is the home of a book, and was built here on the proceeds of an extraordinary copyright law suit fought between the book's editors and a breakfast cereal company.
The book is a guide book, a travel book.
It is of course that invaluable companion for all those who want to see the marvels of the known Universe for less than thirty Altairan Dollars a day - The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
If you then walked to the end of Life Boulevard you would enter the Lalamatine district of shops, bolonut trees and pavement cafes where the UM-Betans come to relax after a hard afternoon's relaxation on the beach.
The Lalamatine district is one of those very few areas which doesn't enjoy a perpetual Saturday afternoon - it enjoys instead the cool of a perpetual early Saturday evening.
Behind it lie the night clubs.
If, on this particular day, afternoon, stretch of eveningtime - call it what you will - you had approached the second pavement cafe on the right you would have seen the usual crowd of UM-Betans chatting, drinking, looking very relaxed, and casually glancing at each other's watches to see how expensive they were.
You would also have seen a couple of rather dishevelled looking hitch-hikers from Algol who had recently arrived on an Arcturan Megafreighter aboard which they had been roughing it for a few days.
They were angry and bewildered to discover that here, within sight of the Hitchhiker's Guide building itself, a simple glass of fruit juice cost the equivalent of over sixty Altairan dollars.
If at that moment you had then looked at the next table but one you would have seen Zaphod Beeblebrox sitting and looking very startled and confused.
The reason for his confusion was that five seconds earlier he had been sitting on the bridge of the starship Heart of Gold.
Zaphod looked nervously out of the corners of his eyes at the two dishevelled hitch-hikers at the next table.
Where the hell was he?
How had he got there?
Where was his ship?
His hand felt the arm of the chair on which he was sitting, and then the table in front of him.
They seemed solid enough.
He sat very still.
Zaphod was looking at it.
Nice place, he thought.
But where?
And why?
He fished in his pocket for his two pairs of sunglasses.
In the same pocket he felt a hard smooth, unidentified lump of very heavy metal.
He pulled it out and looked at it.
He blinked at it in surprise.
Where had he got that?
He returned it to his pocket and put on the sunglasses, annoyed to discover that the metal object had scratched one of the lenses.
Nevertheless, he felt much more comfortable with them on.
They were a double pair of Joo Janta 200 Super-Chromatic Peril Sensitive Sunglasses, which had been specially designed to help people develop a relaxed attitude to danger.
At the first hint of trouble they turn totally black and thus prevent you from seeing anything that might alarm you.
Apart from the scratch the lenses were clear.
He relaxed, but only a little bit.
The angry hitch-hiker continued to glare at his monstrously expensive fruit juice.
You know, I've even heard that they've created a whole electronically synthesized Universe in one of their offices so they can go and research stories during the day and still go to parties in the evening.
Ursa Minor Beta, thought Zaphod.
At least he knew where he was now.
He assumed that this must be his great grandfather's doing, but why?
Much to his annoyance, a thought popped into his mind.
It was very clear and very distinct, and he had now come to recognize these thoughts for what they were.
His instinct was to resist them.
They were the pre-ordained promptings from the dark and locked off parts of his mind.
He sat still and ignored the thought furiously.
It nagged at him.
He ignored it.
It nagged at him.
He ignored it.
It nagged at him.
He gave in to it.
What the hell, he thought, go with the flow.
He was too tired, confused and hungry to resist.
He didn't even know what the thought meant.
Yes?
It fluttered its wings and rolled its eyes.
It glared at all the grubby people cluttering up the foyer, soiling the carpets and leaving dirty handmarks on the upholstery.
It adored working for the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, it just wished there was some way of keeping all the hitch-hikers away.
Weren't they meant to be hanging round dirty spaceports or something?
It was certain that it had read something somewhere in the book about the importance of hanging round dirty spaceports.
Unfortunately most of them seemed to come and hang around in this nice clean shiny foyer after hanging around in extremely dirty spaceports.
And all they ever did was complain.
It shivered its wings.
It waved a petulant tentacle at one of the grubby people who was angrily trying to engage its attention.
The petulant tentacle directed the angry person to look at the notice on the wall to its left and not to interrupt an important phone call.
It slammed down the phone.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is an indispensable companion to all those who are keen to make sense of life in an infinitely complex and confusing Universe, for though it cannot hope to be useful or informative on all matters, it does at least make the reassuring claim, that where it is inaccurate it is at least definitely inaccurate.
In cases of major discrepancy it's always reality that's got it wrong.
This was the gist of the notice.
This has led to some interesting consequences.
The judges concurred, and in a moving speech held that Life itself was in contempt of court, and duly confiscated it from all those there present before going off to enjoy a pleasant evening's ultragolf.
Zaphod Beeblebrox entered the foyer.
He strode up to the insect receptionist.
It did not care to be addressed in this manner.
Get him, right?
I'm so amazingly cool you could keep a side of meat inside me for a month.
I am so hip I have difficulty seeing over my pelvis.
Hell, thought Zaphod.
Zaphod paused while he tried to sort this particular thought out in his mind.
He didn't succeed.
He leaned forward and gripped the tapping tentacle.
The insect blinked at him.
It blinked at him again.
The insect rattled its tentacles together in agitation.
Now.
Zaphod was turning to go.
He turned back.
Zaphod leaned forward, conspirationally.
I have never heard of the cat.
That is all I know.
He winked.
The insect paused for a moment to recover from its agitation and then reached out a tentacle to answer a ringing phone.
A metal hand restrained it.
This was not such an insect, and it couldn't stand robots.
Six of the phones were now ringing.
A million things awaited the insect's attention.
The restraining metal hand fell limply by Marvin's side.
His head hung forward very slightly.
The insect paused.
Its long thin tongue darted out and licked its eyes and darted back again.
The insect shook with rage.
It could hardly speak.
With a grinding of gears Marvin turned and trundled off.
He caught up with Zaphod approaching the elevators.
Zaphod span round in astonishment.
Marvin was forced to say something which came very hard to him.
I have been designed by the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation to take you, the visitor to the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, into these their offices.
There was a moment of silence.
Zaphod knocked one of his heads against the inside wall.
He didn't need this, he thought to himself, this of all things he had no need of.
He hadn't asked to be here.
If he was asked at this moment where he would like to be he would probably have said he would like to be lying on the beach with at least fifty beautiful women and a small team of experts working out new ways they could be nice to him, which was his usual reply.
To this he would probably have added something passionate on the subject of food.
One thing he didn't want to be doing was chasing after the man who ruled the Universe, who was only doing a job which he might as well keep at, because if it wasn't him it would only be someone else.
Most of all he didn't want to be standing in an office block arguing with an elevator.
It paused.
Heights?
At that moment a commotion broke out in the reception hall behind them.
From the walls around them came the sound of suddenly active machinery.
Zaphod looked out of the elevator - an agitated crowd had gathered round the elevator area, pointing and shouting.
Every elevator in the building was coming down, very fast.
He ducked back in.
Modern elevators are strange and complex entities.
Not unnaturally, many elevators imbued with intelligence and precognition became terribly frustrated with the mindless business of going up and down, up and down, experimented briefly with the notion of going sideways, as a sort of existential protest, demanded participation in the decision-making process and finally took to squatting in basements sulking.
An impoverished hitch-hiker visiting any planets in the Sirius star system these days can pick up easy money working as a counsellor for neurotic elevators.
At the fifteenth floor the elevator doors opened quickly.
Zaphod and Marvin bundled out of the elevator which instantly snapped its doors shut and dropped as fast as its mechanism would take it.
Zaphod looked around warily.
The corridor was deserted and silent and gave no clue as to where Zarniwoop might be found.
All the doors that led off the corridor were closed and unmarked.
They were standing close to the bridge which led across from one tower of the building to the other.
Through a large window the brilliant sun of Ursa Minor Beta threw blocks of light in which danced small specks of dust.
A shadow flitted past momentarily.
They both stood and looked in both directions.
It was just a light tremor through the soles of his feet - and another one.
In the sunbeams the flecks of dust danced more vigorously.
Another shadow flitted past.
Zaphod looked at the floor.
He walked across to the window and suddenly stumbled because at that moment his Joo Janta 200 Super-Chromatic Peril Sensitive sunglasses had turned utterly black.
A large shadow flitted past the window with a sharp buzz.
Zaphod ripped off his sunglasses, and as he did so the building shook with a thunderous roar.
He leapt to the window.
Another roar cracked through the building.
He tried to stagger back to the elevator - a pointless manoeuvre he realized, but the only one he could think of.
Suddenly, at the end of the corridor leading at right angles from this one, he caught sight of a figure as it lunged into view, a man.
The man saw him.
Zaphod eyed him with distrust as another bomb blast rocked the building.
He ran towards Zaphod.
The man raced along the corridor, the floor bucking beneath his feet like an excited blanket.
He was short, stocky and weatherbeaten and his clothes looked as if they'd been twice round the Galaxy and back with him in them.
The man indicated his awareness.
It suddenly stopped being light.
Glancing round at the window to see why, Zaphod gaped as a huge sluglike, gunmetal-green spacecraft crept through the air past the building.
Two more followed it.
Zaphod was sure he'd heard someone talk about them when he was President, but he never paid much attention to official matters.
The man was pulling him back through a door.
Fie went with him.
With a searing whine a small black spider-like object shot through the air and disappeared down the corridor.
From the opposite direction came a larger black spider-like object.
It zapped past them.
From over the bridge came a massive rumbling hum.
A gigantic black shape was moving over it from the opposite tower, the size and shape of a tank.
Marvin rose from a pile of rubble further down the corridor and looked at them.
Marvin looked at the gigantic black shape edging forward towards them over the bridge.
He looked down at his own small metal body.
He looked back up at the tank.
The man tugged at Zaphod's arm, and Zaphod followed him off down the corridor.
A point occurred to him about this.
Chapter 7 Marvin stood at the end of the bridge corridor.
He was not in fact a particularly small robot.
His silver body gleamed in the dusty sunbeams and shook with the continual barrage which the building was still undergoing.
He did, however, look pitifully small as the gigantic black tank rolled to a halt in front of him.
The tank examined him with a probe.
The probe withdrew.
Marvin stood there.
The probe extended again for a quick recheck.
It withdrew again.
The tank's engines rumbled, its gears ground.
Molecule-sized electronic relays deep in its micro-brain flipped backwards and forwards in consternation.
Zaphod and the as yet unnamed man lurched up one corridor, down a second and along a third.
The building continued to rock and judder and this puzzled Zaphod.
If they wanted to blow the building up, why was it taking so long?
With difficulty they reached one of a number of totally anonymous unmarked doors and heaved at it.
With a sudden jolt it opened and they fell inside.
All this way, thought Zaphod, all this trouble, all this not-lying-on- the-beach-having-a-wonderful-time, and for what?
A single chair, a single desk and a single dirty ashtray in an undecorated office.
The desk, apart from a bit of dancing dust and single, revolutionary form of paper clip, was empty.
Zaphod tried to size the man up.
Earnest type, he thought, not a barrel of laughs.
He probably apportioned a fair whack of his time to running up and down heaving corridors, breaking down doors and making cryptic remarks in empty offices.
Not knowing what to do with it, he shook it by the corner.
Outside the window, one of the huge slug-like, gunmetal-green spaceships growled past.
Marvin shook his head solemnly.
This was new to Marvin.
From its turret emerged a sharp prong which spat a single lethal blaze of light.
Behind Marvin a wall roared and collapsed as a heap of dust.
The dust billowed briefly, then settled.
There was a dangerous pause.
The machine heaved about with fury.
The electron ram stabbed out another searing blaze of light and took out the wall next to the machine.
It took out the ceiling of the bridge.
It took out the floor, too.
Zaphod looked, and gaped.
Clouds streaked past the office window.
Out in the open air again Zaphod could see the ring of dark green Frogstar Fighters round the uprooted tower of the building.
A network of force beams radiated in from them and held the tower in a firm grip.
Zaphod shook his head in perplexity.
Marvin trudged in through the door, looked at Zaphod accusingly, slumped in a corner and switched himself off.
On the bridge of the Heart of Gold, all was silent.
Arthur stared at the rack in front of him and thought.
He caught Trillian's eyes as she looked at him inquiringly.
He looked back at the rack.
Finally he saw it.
He picked up five small plastic squares and laid them on the board that lay just in front of the rack.
Trillian sighed and started to sort them out again.
Up and down the silent corridors echoed Ford Prefect's feet as he stalked the ship thumping dead instruments.
Why did the ship keep shaking? he thought.
Why did it rock and sway?
Why could he not find out where they were?
Where, basically, were they?
The left-hand tower of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy offices streaked through interstellar space at a speed never equalled either before or since by any other office block in the Universe.
In a room halfway up it, Zaphod Beeblebrox strode angrily.
Roosta sat on the edge of the desk doing some routine towel maintenance.
Out of the window, they could see nothing but the flickering light of the force beams, and vague green streaks which were presumably the distorted shapes of the Frogstar Fighters.
At this speed, space itself was invisible, and indeed unreal.
Zaphod stared at him as if he expected a cuckoo to leap out of his forehead on a small spring.
Zaphod took and looked at it in amazement.
Zaphod sniffed it doubtfully.
Even more doubtfully, he sucked a corner.
Fie spat it out again.
Roosta took it back from him, swung himself off the desk, walked round it, sat in the chair and put his feet up.
Zaphod had never heard of this.
Fie believed that he had heard of all the fun things in the Galaxy, so he assumed that the Total Perspective Vortex was not fun.
Fie asked what it was.
Zaphod nodded a resigned nod.
If he could cook a good meal he wouldn't worry about the rest of the Universe.
Roosta sighed heavily.
Roosta lapsed into an impenetrable silence.
Zaphod was terribly glad.
Chapter 9 The air around the second planet of the Frogstar system was stale and unwholesome.
The dank winds that swept continually over its surface swept over salt flats, dried up marshland, tangled and rotting vegetation and the crumbling remains of ruined cities.
No life moved across its surface.
The ground, like that of many planets in this part of the Galaxy, had long been deserted.
The howl of the wind was desolate enough as it gusted through the old decaying houses of the cities; it was more desolate as it whipped about the bottoms of the tall black towers that swayed uneasily here and there about the surface of this world.
At the top of these towers lived colonies of large, scraggy, evil smelling birds, the sole survivors of the civilization that once lived here.
The howl of the wind was at its most desolate, however, when it passed over a pimple of a place set in the middle of a wide grey plain on the outskirts of the largest of the abandoned cities.
This pimple of a place was the thing that had earned this world the reputation of being the most totally evil place in the Galaxy.
From without it was simply a steel dome about thirty feet across.
From within it was something more monstrous than the mind can comprehend.
About a hundred yards or so away, and separated from it by a pockmarked and blasted stretch of the most barren land imaginable was what would probably have to be described as a landing pad of sorts.
That is to say that scattered over a largish area were the ungainly hulks of two or three dozen crash-landed buildings.
Flitting over and around these buildings was a mind, a mind that was waiting for something.
The mind directed its attention into the air, and before very long a distant speck appeared, surrounded by a ring of smaller specks.
The larger speck was the left-hand tower of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy office building, descending through the stratosphere of Frogstar World B. As it descended, Roosta suddenly broke the long uncomfortable silence that had grown up between the two men.
He stood up and gathered his towel into a bag.
Zaphod looked up at him from where he was sitting in a corner sharing unspoken thoughts with Marvin.
Zaphod leapt up and tried the door, but Roosta had already locked it.
He shrugged and returned to the corner.
Two minutes later, the building crashlanded amongst the other wreckage.
Its escort of Frogstar Fighters deactivated their force beams and soared off into the air again, bound for Frogstar World A, an altogether more congenial spot.
They never landed on Frogstar World B. No one did.
No one ever walked on its surface other than the intended victims of the Total Perspective Vortex.
Zaphod was badly shaken by the crash.
He lay for a while in the silent dusty rubble to which most of the room had been reduced.
He felt that he was at the lowest ebb he had ever reached in his life.
He felt bewildered, he felt lonely, he felt unloved.
Eventually he felt he ought to get whatever it was over with.
He looked around the cracked and broken room.
The wall had split round the door frame, and the door hung open.
The window, by some miracle was closed and unbroken.
For a while he hesitated, then he thought that if his strange and recent companion had been through all that he had been through just to tell him what he had told him, then there must be a good reason for it.
With Marvin's help he got the window open.
Outside it, the cloud of dust aroused by the crash, and the hulks of the other buildings with which this one was surrounded, effectively prevented Zaphod from seeing anything of the world outside.
Not that this concerned him unduly.
His main concern was what he saw when he looked down.
Zarniwoop's office was on the fifteenth floor.
The building had landed at a tilt of about forty-five degrees, but still the descent looked heart-stopping.
Eventually, stung by the continuous series of contemptuous looks that Marvin appeared to be giving him, he took a deep breath and clambered out on to the steeply inclined side of the building.
Marvin followed him, and together they began to crawl slowly and painfully down the fifteen floors that separated them from the ground.
As he crawled, the dank air and dust choked his lungs, his eyes smarted and the terrifying distance down made his heads spin.
About half-way down the side of the shattered building they stopped to rest.
It seemed to Zaphod as he lay there panting with fear and exhaustion that Marvin seemed a mite more cheerful than usual.
Eventually he realized this wasn't so.
The robot just seemed cheerful in comparison with his own mood.
A large, scraggy black bird came flapping through the slowly settling clouds of dust and, stretching down its scrawny legs, landed on an inclined window ledge a couple of yards from Zaphod.
It folded its ungainly wings and teetered awkwardly on its perch.
Its wingspan must have been something like six feet, and its head and neck seemed curiously large for a bird.
Its face was flat, the beak underdeveloped, and half-way along the underside of its wings the vestiges of something handlike could be clearly seen.
In fact, it looked almost human.
It turned its heavy eyes on Zaphod and clicked its beak in a desultory fashion.
Zaphod watched its departure in bewilderment.
He was quite prepared to believe the alternative explanation, that he was in fact hallucinating.
Twisting round violently to find the source of the voice nearly caused Zaphod to fall off the building.
He grabbed savagely at a protruding window fitting and cut his hand on it.
He hung on, breathing heavily.
The voice had no visible source whatever - there was no one there.
Nevertheless, it spoke again.
Zaphod looked wildly about.
The voice was deep and quiet.
In other circumstances it would even be described as soothing.
There is, however, nothing soothing about being addressed by a disembodied voice out of nowhere, particularly if you are, like Zaphod Beeblebrox, not at your best and hanging from a ledge eight storeys up a crashed building.
Zaphod looked and saw a series of short horizontal grooves leading all the way down the side of the building.
Gratefully he shifted himself across to them.
Zaphod nodded.
He took out his Peril Sensitive Sunglasses again.
They were completely black, and by now quite badly scratched by the unexpected metal object in his pocket.
He put them on.
He would find his way down the building more comfortably if he didn't actually have to look at what he was doing.
Minutes later he clambered over the ripped and mangled foundations of the building and, once more removing his sunglasses, he dropped to the ground.
Marvin joined him a moment or so later and lay face down in the dust and rubble, from which position he seemed too disinclined to move.
Zaphod looked around slowly and carefully, just to see if he had missed something which might be the source of the voice.
All he saw, however, was the dust, the rubble and the towering hulks of the encircling buildings.
Zaphod wasn't sure about this.
The voice said nothing for a while.
Zaphod looked around uneasily.
He didn't know if it was gone or was still there or what it was doing.
Then the voice spoke again.
Zaphod clambered over the rubble, and rounded the corner of one of the wrecked buildings that was obscuring his view.
You must come.
A soft keening sound drifted through the air, a pale, sad sound that seemed to be without any kind of focus.
It was only by listening very carefully that Zaphod was able to detect the direction from which it was coming.
Slowly, dazedly, he stumbled off in its wake.
What else was there to do?
Chapter 10 The Universe, as has been observed before, is an unsettlingly big place, a fact which for the sake of a quiet life most people tend to ignore.
Many would happily move to somewhere rather smaller of their own devising, and this is what most beings in fact do.
In which tree they are born, live, fall in love, carve tiny speculative articles in the bark on the meaning of life, the futility of death and the importance of birth control, fight a few extremely minor wars, and eventually die strapped to the underside of some of the less accessible outer branches.
In fact the only Oglaroonians who ever leave their tree are those who are hurled out of it for the heinous crime of wondering whether any of the other trees might be capable of supporting life at all, or indeed whether the other trees are anything other than illusions brought on by eating too many Oglanuts.
Exotic though this behaviour may seem, there is no life form in the Galaxy which is not in some way guilty of the same thing, which is why the Total Perspective Vortex is as horrific as it is.
The grey plain stretched before Zaphod, a ruined, shattered plain.
The wind whipped wildly over it.
Visible in the middle was the steel pimple of the dome.
This, gathered Zaphod, was where he was going.
This was the Total Perspective Vortex.
As he stood and gazed bleakly at it, a sudden inhuman wail of terror emanated from it as of a man having his soul burnt from his body.
It screamed above the wind and died away.
Zaphod started with fear and his blood seemed to turn to liquid helium.
It is always played to the next victim.
My body that is.
It goes to a lot of parties without me.
Says I only get in the way.
There was a long and slightly chilly pause before Gargravarr spoke again.
Zaphod muttered a bewildered and embarrassed apology.
The voice fluttered unhappily.
The voice was still again, leaving Zaphod with no idea of what to say.
He mumbled uncertainly.
We always had the greatest arguments over sex and fishing.
Eventually we tried to combine the two, but that only led to disaster, as you can probably imagine.
And now my body refuses to let me in.
He paused again, tragically.
The wind whipped across the plain.
I pointed out that in fact I was meant to inhibit it, and it said that that was exactly the sort of smart alec remark that got right up a body's left nostril, and so we left it.
Custodian of the Total Perspective Vortex.
No one will ever walk on the ground of this planet.
Except that on the high streets of these cities there were slightly more shoe shops than one might have thought necessary.
And slowly, insidiously, the numbers of these shoe shops were increasing.
It's a well known economic phenomenon but tragic to see it in operation, for the more shoe shops there were, the more shoes they had to make and the worse and more unwearable they became.
And the worse they were to wear, the more people had to buy to keep themselves shod, and the more the shops proliferated, until the whole economy of the place passed what I believe is termed the Shoe Event Horizon, and it became no longer economically possible to build anything other than shoe shops.
Result - collapse, ruin and famine.
Most of the population died out.
Those few who had the right kind of genetic instability mutated into birds - you've seen one of them - who cursed their feet, cursed the ground, and vowed that none should walk on it again.
Unhappy lot.
Zaphod shook his head in bemusement and stumbled forward across the plain.
Wonderful fishing.
I flit back there in the evenings.
Though all I can do now is watch.
The Total Perspective Vortex is the only thing on this planet with any function.
At that moment another dismal scream rent the air and Zaphod shuddered.
Gargravarr made no reply, but merely resumed his mournful humming till they reached the tarnished steel dome in the middle of the plain.
As they reached it, a door hummed open in the side, revealing a small darkened chamber within.
Zaphod started with fear.
Zaphod peered nervously inside.
The chamber was very small.
It was steel-lined and there was hardly space in it for more than one man.
With infinite trepidation Zaphod stepped into it.
He was aware of Gargravarr being in the elevator with him, though the disembodied man was not for the moment speaking.
The elevator began its descent.
At the bottom of the shaft, the rear of the elevator opened up and Zaphod stumbled out into a smallish, functional, steel-lined chamber.
At the far side of it stood a single upright steel box, just large enough for a man to stand in.
It was that simple.
It connected to a small pile of components and instruments via a single thick wire.
Didn't look too bad, thought Zaphod.
He opened the door of the box and stepped in.
Inside the box he waited.
After five seconds there was a click, and the entire Universe was there in the box with him.
Chapter 11 The Total Perspective Vortex derives its picture of the whole Universe on the principle of extrapolated matter analyses.
To explain - since every piece of matter in the Universe is in some way affected by every other piece of matter in the Universe, it is in theory possible to extrapolate the whole of creation - every sun, every planet, their orbits, their composition and their economic and social history from, say, one small piece of fairy cake.
The man who invented the Total Perspective Vortex did so basically in order to annoy his wife.
Trin Tragula - for that was his name - was a dreamer, a thinker, a speculative philosopher or, as his wife would have it, an idiot.
And she would nag him incessantly about the utterly inordinate amount of time he spent staring out into space, or mulling over the mechanics of safety pins, or doing spectrographic analyses of pieces of fairy cake.
And so he built the Total Perspective Vortex - just to show her.
And into one end he plugged the whole of reality as extrapolated from a piece of fairy cake, and into the other end he plugged his wife: so that when he turned it on she saw in one instant the whole infinity of creation and herself in relation to it.
To Trin Tragula's horror, the shock completely annihilated her brain but to his satisfaction he realized that he had proved conclusively that if life is going to exist in a Universe of this size, then the one thing it cannot afford to have is a sense of proportion.
The door of the Vortex swung open.
From his disembodied mind Gargravarr watched dejectedly.
He had rather liked Zaphod Beeblebrox in a strange sort of way.
He was clearly a man of many qualities, even if they were mostly bad ones.
He waited for him to flop forwards out of the box, as they all did.
Instead, he stepped out.
Gargravarr's mind was reeling in astonishment.
Had his body been with him it would have sat down heavily with its mouth hanging open.
Zaphod shrugged smugly.
I'm a really terrific and great guy.
His gaze passed over the machinery which powered the vortex and suddenly stopped, startled.
He breathed heavily.
He ripped the small piece of confectionery from the sensors with which it was surrounded.
He ate it.
Chapter 12 A short while later he was running across the plain in the direction of the ruined city.
The dank air wheezed heavily in his lungs and he frequently stumbled with the exhaustion he was still feeling.
Night was beginning to fall too, and the rough ground was treacherous.
The elation of his recent experience was still with him though.
The whole Universe.
He had seen the whole Universe stretching to infinity around him - everything.
And with it had come the clear and extraordinary knowledge that he was the most important thing in it.
Having a conceited ego is one thing.
Actually being told by a machine is another.
He didn't have time to reflect on this matter.
Gargravarr had told him that he would have to alert his masters as to what had happened, but that he was prepared to leave a decent interval before doing so.
Enough time for Zaphod to make a break and find somewhere to hide.
What he was going to do he didn't know, but feeling that he was the most important person in the Universe gave him the confidence to believe that something would turn up.
Nothing else on this blighted planet could give him much grounds for optimism.
He ran on, and soon reached the outskirts of the abandoned city.
He walked along cracked and gaping roads riddled with scrawny weeds, the holes filled with rotting shoes.
The buildings he passed were so crumbled and decrepit he thought it unsafe to enter any of them.
Where could he hide?
He hurried on.
After a while the remains of a wide sweeping road led off from the one down which he was walking, and at its end lay a vast low building, surrounded with sundry smaller ones, the whole surrounded by the remains of a perimeter barrier.
The large main building still seemed reasonably solid, and Zaphod turned off to see if it might provide him with... well with anything.
He approached the building.
Along one side of it - the front it would seem since it faced a wide concreted apron area - were three gigantic doors, maybe sixty feet high.
The far one of these was open, and towards this, Zaphod ran.
Inside, all was gloom, dust and confusion.
Giant cobwebs lay over everything.
Part of the infrastructure of the building had collapsed, part of the rear wall had caved in, and a thick choking dust lay inches over the floor.
Through the heavy gloom huge shapes loomed, covered with debris.
The shapes were sometimes cylindrical, sometimes bulbous, sometimes like eggs, or rather cracked eggs.
Most of them were split open or falling apart, some were mere skeletons.
They were all spacecraft, all derelict.
Zaphod wandered in frustration among the hulks.
There was nothing here that remotely approached the serviceable.
Even the mere vibration of his footsteps caused one precarious wreck to collapse further into itself.
Towards the rear of the building lay one old ship, slightly larger than the others, and buried beneath even deeper piles of dust and cobwebs.
Its outline, however, seemed unbroken.
Zaphod approached it with interest, and as he did so, he tripped over an old feedline.
He tried to toss the feedline aside, and to his surprise discovered that it was still connected to the ship.
To his utter astonishment he realized that the feedline was also humming slightly.
He stared at the ship in disbelief, and then back down at the feedline in his hands.
He tore off his jacket and threw it aside.
Crawling along on his hands and knees he followed the feedline to the point where it connected with the ship.
The connection was sound, and the slight humming vibration was more distinct.
His heart was beating fast.
He wiped away some grime and laid an ear against the ship's side.
He could only hear a faint, indeterminate noise.
He rummaged feverishly amongst the debris lying on the floor all about him and found a short length of tubing, and a non- biodegradable plastic cup.
Out of this he fashioned a crude stethoscope and placed it against the side of the ship.
What he heard made his brains turn somersaults.
We are currently awaiting the loading of our complement of small lemon-soaked paper napkins for your comfort, refreshment and hygiene during the journey.
Meanwhile we thank you for your patience.
Zaphod staggered backwards, staring wildly at the ship.
He walked around for a few moments in a daze.
In so doing he suddenly caught sight of a giant departure board still hanging, but by only one support, from the ceiling above him.
It was covered with grime, but some of the figures were still discernible.
Zaphod's eyes searched amongst the figures, then made some brief calculations.
His eyes widened.
That was how late the ship was.
Two minutes later he was on board.
As he stepped out of the airlock, the air that greeted him was cool and fresh - the air conditioning was still working.
The lights were still on.
He moved out of the small entrance chamber into a short narrow corridor and stepped nervously down it.
Suddenly a door opened and a figure stepped out in front of him.
When his heart had started beating again he followed her.
She opened the door at the end of the corridor and walked through.
He followed her through the door.
They were now in the passenger compartment and Zaphod's heart stopped still again for a moment.
In every seat sat a passenger, strapped into his or her seat.
All of them were quite clearly alive - but sleeping.
Zaphod had the creeping horrors.
He walked slowly down the aisle as in a dream.
By the time he was half-way down the aisle, the stewardess had reached the other end.
She turned and spoke.
We will be taking off as soon as we possibly can.
There was a slight hum.
At that moment, all the passengers awoke.
They awoke screaming and clawing at their straps and life support systems that held them tightly in their seats.
They screamed and bawled and hollered till Zaphod thought his ears would shatter.
They struggled and writhed as the stewardess patiently moved up the aisle placing a small cup of coffee and a packet of biscuits in front of each one of them.
Then one of them rose from his seat.
He turned and looked at Zaphod.
Zaphod's skin was crawling all over his body as if it was trying to get off.
He turned and ran from the bedlam.
He plunged through the door and back into the corridor.
The man pursued him.
He raced in a frenzy to the end of the corridor, through the entrance chamber and beyond.
He arrived on the flight deck, slammed and bolted the door behind him.
He leant back against the door breathing hard.
Within seconds, a hand started beating on the door.
From somewhere on the flight deck a metallic voice addressed him.
Please return to your seat, and wait for the ship to take off.
Coffee and biscuits are being served.
This is your autopilot speaking.
Zaphod said nothing.
He breathed hard, behind him, the hand continued to knock on the door.
Passengers are to be kept temporarily in suspended animation, for their comfort and convenience.
Coffee and biscuits are being served every year, after which passengers are returned to suspended animation for their continued comfort and convenience.
Departure will take place when the flight stores are complete.
Zaphod moved away from the door, on which the pounding had now ceased.
He approached the flight console.
It's a wasteland, a desert.
Civilization's been and gone, man.
There will one day be lemon-soaked paper napkins.
Till then there will be a short delay.
But at that moment the door opened.
Zaphod span round to see the man who had pursued him standing there.
He carried a large briefcase.
He was smartly dressed, and his hair was short.
He had no beard and no long fingernails.
Zaphod Beeblebrox wittered.
His mouths said foolish things.
He dropped into a chair.
He put the briefcase down and sat in another chair.
Zaphod shook his heads at him and burbled.
He patted the briefcase smugly.
Zaphod glared at him with resentment and loathing.
His self assurance and smugness made Zaphod seethe.
To protect my secret - and myself - I retreated to the safety of this totally artificial Universe and hid myself away in a forgotten cruise liner.
I was secure.
He smiled a tight little smile which Zaphod wanted to hit with a brick.
You are therefore the most important person in this Universe.
He felt collapsed.
The Heart of Gold.
Zaphod looked at him in mystification.
I took it off.
Zarniwoop stood up and gestured to Zaphod to follow him.
Out in the entrance chamber again, they could hear the screams of the passengers being fed coffee and biscuits.
Zarniwoop held up a silencing finger as the hatchway swung open.
A few feet away from them they could see Zaphod's jacket lying in the debris.
As they watched, the pocket on the jacket suddenly bulged.
It split, it ripped.
The small metal model of the Heart of Gold that Zaphod had been bewildered to discover in his pocket was growing.
It grew, it continued to grow.
It reached, after two minutes, its full size.
Zaphod swayed.
He lifted up his briefcase and opened it.
He twisted a single switch inside it.
The scene before them shimmered briefly - and reappeared exactly as before.
I've had all I want of this.
He smiled the smile that Zaphod had wanted to hit and this time Zaphod hit it.
Chapter 13 Ford Prefect bounded up to the bridge of the Heart of Gold.
Trillian and Arthur were asleep on the floor.
Hey it's good to see you Trillian, Ford, Monkeyman.
When Zarniwoop entered a minute or so later with a black eye, he regarded the four wisps of smoke with interest.
Chapter 14 Four inert bodies sank through spinning blackness.
Consciousness had died, cold oblivion pulled the bodies down and down into the pit of unbeing.
The roar of silence echoed dismally around them and they sank at last into a dark and bitter sea of heaving red that slowly engulfed them, seemingly for ever.
After what seemed an eternity the sea receded and left them lying on a cold hard shore, the flotsam and jetsam of the stream of Life, the Universe, and Everything.
Cold spasms shook them, lights danced sickeningly around them.
The cold hard shore tipped and span and then stood still.
It shone darkly - it was a very highly polished cold hard shore.
A green blur watched them disapprovingly.
It coughed.
Ford Prefect's consciousness snapped back like elastic, making his brain smart.
Fie looked up woozily at the green blur.
In so far as it is possible for a green blur to arch its eyebrows disdainfully, this is what the green blur now did.
Arthur Dent was grappling with his consciousness the way one grapples with a lost bar of soap in the bath.
Fie tested the theory that it must lie in the opposite direction from the cold hard shore on which he was lying, and staggered to what he hoped were his feet.
He had raised himself on to his elbows but it didn't seem to improve things.
He slumped down again.
A dull hoarse gurgling sound came from the floor.
It was Zaphod Beeblebrox attempting to speak.
We must have been blown to bits.
He looked at around him at the various shapes that were at last becoming proper shapes instead of vague and wobbling shapeless shapes.
That is to say, the thing that surprised him was not that he could see, but what he could see.
They looked about themselves in bemusement.
The chandeliers were in fact a little on the flashy side and the low vaulted ceiling from which they hung would not, in an ideal Universe, have been painted in that particular shade of deep turquoise, and even if it had been it wouldn't have been highlighted by concealed moodlighting.
This is not, however, an ideal Universe, as was further evidenced by the eye-crossing patterns of the inlaid marble floor, and the way in which the fronting for the eighty-yard long marble-topped bar had been made.
The fronting for the eighty-yard long marble- topped bar had been made by stitching together nearly twenty thousand Antarean Mosaic Lizard skins, despite the fact that the twenty thousand lizards concerned had needed them to keep their insides in.
A few smartly dressed creatures were lounging casually at the bar or relaxing in the richly coloured body-hugging seats that were deployed here and there about the bar area.
A young VI'Hurg officer and his green steaming young lady passed through the large smoked glass doors at the far end of the bar into the dazzling light of the main body of the Restaurant beyond.
Behind Arthur was a large curtained bay window.
He pulled aside the corner of the curtain and looked out at a landscape which under normal circumstances would have given Arthur the creeping horrors.
These were not, however, normal circumstances, for the thing that froze his blood and made his skin try to crawl up his back and off the top of his head was the sky.
The sky was...
An attendant flunkey politely drew the curtain back into place.
Zaphod's eyes flashed.
Arthur was profoundly relieved to turn his attention from what he had just seen.
Ford's head swivelled towards him.
He spoke with feeling.
The waiter laughed a polite little waiter's laugh.
The waiter coughed a polite little waiter's cough.
The waiter smiled a polite little waiter's smile.
He had almost exhausted his polite little waiter repertoire and would soon be slipping into his role of a rather tight lipped and sarcastic little waiter.
The waiter tightened his lips.
In an extraordinary gesture which is pointless attempting to describe, Zaphod Beeblebrox slapped both his foreheads with two of his arms and one of his thighs with the other.
We finally did it.
We finally got to where we were going.
He took a deep breath.
He didn't need to do this since his body was supplied with the peculiar assortment of gases it required for survival from a small intravenous device strapped to his leg.
There are times, however, when whatever your metabolism you have to take a deep breath.
Zaphod grinned two manic grins, sauntered over to the bar and bought most of it.
Chapter 15 The Restaurant at the End of the Universe is one of the most extraordinary ventures in the entire history of catering.
It has been built on the fragmented remains of... it will be built on the fragmented... that is to say it will have been built by this time, and indeed has been - One of the major problems encountered in time travel is not that of accidentally becoming your own father or mother.
There is no problem involved in becoming your own father or mother that a broadminded and well-adjusted family can't cope with.
There is also no problem about changing the course of history - the course of history does not change because it all fits together like a jigsaw.
All the important changes have happened before the things they were supposed to change and it all sorts itself out in the end.
The major problem is quite simply one of grammar, and the main work to consult in this matter is Dr. Dan Streetmentioner's Time Traveller's Handbook of 1001 Tense Formations.
It will tell you for instance how to describe something that was about to happen to you in the past before you avoided it by time - jumping forward two days in order to avoid it.
The event will be described differently according to whether you are talking about it from the standpoint of your own natural time, from a time in the further future, or a time in the further past and is further complicated by the possibility of conducting conversations whilst you are actually travelling from one time to another with the intention of becoming your own father or mother.
Most readers get as far as the Future Semi-Conditionally Modified Subinverted Plagal Past Subjunctive Intentional before giving up: and in fact in later editions of the book all the pages beyond this point have been left blank to save on printing costs.
To resume: The Restaurant at the End of the Universe is one of the most extraordinary ventures in the entire history of catering.
This is, many would say, impossible.
This is, many would say, equally impossible.
This is, many would now insist, absolutely impossible.
This, it can be explained patiently, is also impossible.
This, even if the rest were true, which it isn't, is patently impossible, say the doubters.
All you have to do is deposit one penny in a savings account in your own era, and when you arrive at the End of Time the operation of compound interest means that the fabulous cost of your meal has been paid for.
Chapter 16 At the bar, Zaphod was rapidly becoming as tired as a newt.
His heads knocked together and his smiles were coming out of synch.
He was miserably happy.
Where have you been?
Where have we been?
Zaphod's left head sobered up, leaving his right to sink further into the obscurity of drink.
They want me to find the man who rules the Universe, but I don't care to meet him.
His left head watched his right head saying this and then nodded.
Ford had another Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster, the drink which has been described as the alcoholic equivalent of a mugging-expensive and bad for the head.
Whatever had happened, Ford decided, he didn't really care too much.
That would not be cool and froody.
If you want to know what happened let's just say I had the whole situation in my pocket.
Ford shrugged.
Zaphod giggled into his drink.
It frothed up over the side of the glass and started to eat its way into the marble bar top.
A wild-skinned sky-gypsy approached them and played electric violin at them until Zaphod gave him a lot of money and he agreed to go away again.
The gypsy approached Arthur and Trillian sitting in another part of the bar.
The waiter approached.
Seen from the outside, which it never is, the Restaurant resembles a giant glittering starfish beached on a forgotten rock.
Each of its arms houses the bars, the kitchens, the forcefield generators which protect the entire structure and the decayed planet on which it sits, and the Time Turbines which slowly rock the whole affair backwards and forwards across the crucial moment.
In the centre sits the gigantic golden dome, almost a complete globe, and it was into this area that Zaphod, Ford, Arthur and Trillian now passed.
At least five tons of glitter alone had gone into it before them, and covered every available surface.
The other surfaces were not available because they were already encrusted with jewels, precious sea shells from Santraginus, gold leaf, mosaic tiles, lizard skins and a million unidentifiable embellishments and decorations.
Glass glittered, silver shone, gold gleamed, Arthur Dent goggled.
The waiter thought they sounded like a couple of bailiffs.
The tables were fanned out in a large circle around a central stage area where a small band were playing light music, at least a thousand tables was Arthur's guess, and interspersed amongst them were swaying palms, hissing fountains, grotesque statuary, in short all the paraphernalia common to all Restaurants where little expense has been spared to give the impression that no expense has been spared.
Arthur glanced around, half expecting to see someone making an American Express commercial.
Zaphod lurched into Ford, who lurched back into Zaphod.
Fie paused.
They were waiting for the greatest show in the Universe.
Fie pointed a swaying finger.
Zaphod tried to follow Ford's finger with his eyes but it made him feel dizzy.
Finally he saw.
Wow, bigger than the biggest thing ever.
He led her off to where the waiter had been waiting all this time at the table.
Arthur followed them feeling very lost and alone.
Ford waded off through the throng to renew an old acquaintance.
Great to see you big boy, how's the noise?
You're looking great, really very, very fat and unwell.
He slapped the man on the back and was mildly surprised that it seemed to elict no response.
The Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters swirling round inside him told him to plunge on regardless.
The Bistro Illegal, remember?
Slim's Throat Emporium?
Hotblack Desiato offered no opinion as to whether they were great days or not.
Ford was not perturbed.
And go around confiscating meals and drinks right?
Till we got food poisoning.
Oh, and then there were the long nights of talking and drinking in those smelly rooms above the Cafe Lou in Gretchen Town, New Betel, and you were always in the next room trying to write songs on your ajuitar and we all hated them.
Ford's eyes were beginning to mist over.
And we said, Hadra and Sulijoo and me, that we didn't think you had the option.
And what do you do now?
He turned and solicited the attention of those at nearby tables.
Hotblack Desiato made no attempt either to confirm or deny this fact, and the attention of the temporary audience waned rapidly.
Ford staggered slightly, and sat down heavily on the chair facing Hotblack Desiato.
Not to waste a happy accident, he drained the glass.
Ford crashed his fist into his other hand to illustrate this feat graphically.
He knocked the bottle over again.
Sun!
His eyes followed the stream of liquid glugging out of the bottle on to the table.
Something ought to be done about it, he thought.
More to the point he had not yet even moved.
A large meaty hand landed on his shoulder from behind and pushed him aside.
He slid gracelessly off his seat and peered upwards to see if he could spot the owner of this discourteous hand.
The owner was not hard to spot, on account of his being something of the order of seven feet tall and not slightly built with it.
In fact he was built the way one builds leather sofas, shiny, lumpy and with lots of solid stuffing.
The suit into which the man's body had been stuffed looked as if it's only purpose in life was to demonstrate how difficult it was to get this sort of body into a suit.
The face had the texture of an orange and the colour of an apple, but there the resemblance to anything sweet ended.
He staggered back to his feet again and was disappointed that the top of his head didn't come further up the man's body.
The man considered this for a moment.
He wasn't used to being asked this sort of question.
Nevertheless, after a while he came up with an answer.
He glanced at Hotblack Desiato, who still hadn't moved so much as an eyelash.
Ford glanced anxiously at Hotblack again and was forced to admit to himself that the bodyguard seemed to have the facts on his side.
There was still not the slightest sign of movement, let alone keen interest in Ford's welfare.
The bodyguard told him.
Chapter 17 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy notes that Disaster Area, a plutonium rock band from the Gagrakacka Mind Zones, are generally held to be not only the loudest rock band in the Galaxy, but in fact the loudest noise of any kind at all.
Regular concert goers judge that the best sound balance is usually to be heard from within large concrete bunkers some thirty-seven miles from the stage, whilst the musicians themselves play their instruments by remote control from within a heavily insulated spaceship which stays in orbit around the planet - or more frequently around a completely different planet.
Their songs are on the whole very simple and mostly follow the familiar theme of boy-being meets girl-being beneath a silvery moon, which then explodes for no adequately explored reason.
Many worlds have now banned their act altogether, sometimes for artistic reasons, but most commonly because the band's public address system contravenes local strategic arms limitations treaties.
This has not, however, stopped their earnings from pushing back the boundaries of pure hypermathematics, and their chief research accountant has recently been appointed Professor of Neomathematics at the University of Maximegalon, in recognition of both his General and his Special Theories of Disaster Area Tax Returns, in which he proves that the whole fabric of the space-time continuum is not merely curved, it is in fact totally bent.
Ford staggered back to the table where Zaphod, Arthur and Trillian were sitting waiting for the fun to begin.
Ford waggled his head noncommittally.
He sat down.
The waiter approached.
In a small room in one of the arms of the Restaurant complex a tall, thin, gangling figure pulled aside a curtain and oblivion looked him in the face.
It was not a pretty face, perhaps because oblivion had looked him in it so many times.
It was too long for a start, the eyes too sunken and too hooded, the cheeks too hollow, his lips were too thin and too long, and when they parted his teeth looked too much like a recently polished bay window.
The hands that held the curtain were long and thin too: they were also cold.
They lay lightly along the folds of the curtain and gave the impression that if he didn't watch them like a hawk they would crawl away of their own accord and do something unspeakable in a corner.
He let the curtain drop and the terrible light that had played on his features went off to play somewhere more healthy.
He prowled around his small chamber like a mantis contemplating an evening's preying, finally settling on a rickety chair by a trestle table, where he leafed through a few sheets of jokes.
A bell rang.
He pushed the thin sheaf of papers aside and stood up.
His hands brushed limply over some of the one million rainbow-coloured sequins with which his jacket was festooned, and he was gone through the door.
In the Restaurant the lights dimmed, the band quickened its pace, a single spotlight stabbed down into the darkness of the stairway that led up to the centre of the stage.
Up the stairs bounded a tall brilliantly coloured figure.
He burst on to the stage, tripped lightly up to the microphone, removed it from its stand with one swoop of his long thin hand and stood for a moment bowing left and right to the audience acknowledging their applause and displaying to them his bay window.
He waved to his particular friends in the audience even though there weren't any there, and waited for the applause to die down.
He held up his hand and smiled a smile that stretched not merely from ear to ear, but seemed to extend some way beyond the mere confines of his face.
He eyed them with a twinkling eye.
With a gesture he deftly conjured another round of spontaneous applause.
With another gesture he cut it.
Another burst of applause died away quickly as the lights dimmed down further.
On every table candles ignited themselves spontaneously, eliciting a slight gasp from all the diners and wreathing them in a thousand tiny flickering lights and a million intimate shadows.
A tremor of excitement thrilled through the darkened Restaurant as the vast golden dome above them began very very slowly to dim, to darken, to fade.
Max's voice was hushed as he continued.
Even the soft tootling of the band faded away as stunned shock descended on all those who had not seen this sight before.
A monstrous, grisly light poured in on them, - a hideous light, -a boiling, pestilential light, - a light that would have disfigured hell.
The Universe was coming to an end.
For a few interminable seconds the Restaurant span silently through the raging void.
Then Max spoke again.
The band struck up again.
The baleful turmoil of the skies continued.
Hesitantly the audience began to clap and after a moment or so normal conversation resumed.
Max began his round of the tables, swapping jokes, shouting with laughter, earning his living.
A large dairy animal approached Zaphod Beeblebrox's table, a large fat meaty quadruped of the bovine type with large watery eyes, small horns and what might almost have been an ingratiating smile on its lips.
It harrumphed and gurgled a bit, wriggled its hind quarters into a more comfortable position and gazed peacefully at them.
Its gaze was met by looks of startled bewilderment from Arthur and Trillian, a resigned shrug from Ford Prefect and naked hunger from Zaphod Beeblebrox.
Zaphod leapt to his feet and started prodding and feeling the animal's shoulder appreciatively.
It gave a mellow grunt, gurgled again and started to chew the cud.
It swallowed the cud again.
Then he thought about it for a moment.
I don't care, I'm not going to think about it now.
The Universe raged about him in its death throes.
Which is why it was eventually decided to cut through the whole tangled problem and breed an animal that actually wanted to be eaten and was capable of saying so clearly and distinctly.
It managed a very slight bow.
Four rare steaks please, and hurry.
The animal staggered to its feet.
It gave a mellow gurgle.
He turned and gave a friendly wink to Arthur.
It waddled unhurriedly off into the kitchen.
A matter of minutes later the waiter arrived with four huge steaming steaks.
Zaphod and Ford wolfed straight into them without a second's hesitation.
Trillian paused, then shrugged and started into hers.
Arthur stared at his feeling slightly ill.
And the band played on.
All around the Restaurant people and things relaxed and chatted.
The air was filled with talk of this and that, and with the mingled scents of exotic plants, extravagant foods and insidious wines.
For an infinite number of miles in every direction the universal cataclysm was gathering to a stupefying climax.
Glancing at his watch.
Max returned to the stage with a flourish.
He paused.
He caught the audience with a glittering eye.
He paused again.
Tonight his timing was immaculate.
Time after time he had done this show, night after night.
Not that the word night had any meaning here at the extremity of time.
All there was the endless repetition of the final moment, as the Restaurant rocked slowly forward over the brink of time's furthest edge - and back again.
His voice dropped.
They had to strain to hear him.
He dropped his voice still lower.
In the stillness, a fly would not have dared clear its throat.
Void.
Emptiness.
Oblivion.
The band gave him a musical sting.
He wished they wouldn't, he didn't need it, not an artist of his calibre.
He could play the audience like his own musical instrument.
They were laughing with relief.
He followed on.
He beamed at his happy, laughing audience.
He glanced up at the sky, going through the same dead routine every night, but his glance was only for a fraction of a second.
He trusted it to do its job, as one professional trusts another.
He pulled a card from his pocket.
A rousing cheer came from the back, but he pretended not to hear.
He peered around trying to find them.
He got it, as he always did.
He lapped up the laughter.
Away to his right came a rumble of thunder.
Lightning arced across the stage.
A small group of hairy men with helmets sat looking very pleased with themselves, and raised their glasses to him.
Hasbeens, he thought to himself.
They did their trick with the lightning again.
Max gave them a very thin lipped smile.
A party of smartly dressed young dogs stopped throwing rolls at each other and started throwing rolls at the stage.
They yapped and barked unintelligibly.
There were about twenty of them, sitting right out on the edge of the floor, ascetically dressed, sipping mineral water nervously, and staying apart from the festivities.
They blinked resentfully as the spotlight was turned on them.
The party of Zarquon's followers sat rigid, refusing to be buffeted by the waves of uncharitable laughter which swept over them.
Max restrained his audience.
The audience clapped respectfully.
He blew a kiss to the stony-faced party and returned to the centre of the stage.
He grabbed a tall stool and sat on it.
Yes, absolutely marvellous.
Because I know that so many of you come here time and time again, which I think is really wonderful, to come and watch this final end of everything, and then return home to your own eras... and raise families, strive for new and better societies, fight terrible wars for what you know to be right... it really gives one hope for the future of all lifekind.
Arthur turned to Ford - he hadn't quite got this place worked out in his mind.
Ford gave him a three-Pan-Galactic-Gargle-Blaster look, in other words a rather unsteady one.
He turned his attention back to a bowl of soup he'd managed to get from the waiter to replace his steak.
He grabbed at a napkin off the table and fumbled hopelessly with it.
It took him a while to say this last part, and Arthur hated to interrupt him.
I mean...
Right.
You get this bath.
Right.
A large round bath.
Imagine you've got this bath.
And it's ebony.
So what you do is, you see, you fill it with fine white sand, alright?
Or sugar.
Fine white sand, and/or sugar.
Anything.
Doesn't matter.
Sugar's fine.
You don't see at all.
I haven't got to the clever bit yet.
Ford thought for a moment, trying to remember what the clever bit was.
This is the clever bit, I remember now that this is the clever bit.
Threading it backwards is definitely the clever bit.
So then, you just sit and watch it, and everything just appears to spiral upwards out of the plughole and fill the bath.
Fie reached for his wine glass.
Tipping back his chair to look for it.
Ford collided with the small green waiter who was approaching the table carrying a portable telephone.
Ford excused himself to the waiter explaining that it was because he was extremely drunk.
The waiter said that that was quite alright and that he perfectly understood.
Ford thanked the waiter for his kind indulgence, attempted to tug his forelock, missed by six inches and slid under the table.
Here?
One of his minds raced.
The other dawdled lovingly over the food it was still shovelling in.
There were now so many people after him he'd lost count.
He shouldn't have made such a conspicuous entrance.
Hell, why not though, he thought.
How do you know you're having fun if there's no one watching you have it?
He kicked Ford.
Zaphod tried this in one brain, then in the other.
This is going to be a long night, thought the waiter.
Arthur bristled.
Arthur stuttered in fury and said nothing apposite, or indeed coherent.
He smiled.
He had a wonderful feeling that he had finally won through against what had seemed to be insuperable odds.
I told the computer to send us to the nearest place to eat, that's exactly what it did.
Give or take five hundred and seventy-six thousand million years, we never moved.
They all agreed this was very neat.
Zaphod clapped his hands to his heads.
The little waiter's eyebrows wandered about his forehead in confusion.
There was a long pause before a thin low voice came up the line.
Zaphod cupped his hands over the phone.
Food, wine, a little personal abuse and the Universe going foom.
Again the pause.
Can I pick up that piece of paper!
Would you like me to go and stick my head in a bucket of water?
I've got one ready.
Sad little clunks and gurgles came up the line.
Few of the other diners paid them any attention as they weaved their way through the Restaurant to the exit.
Their eyes were riveted on the horror of the skies.
There were one or two slightly hesitant cheers from somewhere at the back.
Chapter 18 The main reception foyer was almost empty but Ford nevertheless weaved his way through it.
Zaphod grasped him firmly by the arm and manoeuvred him into a cubicle standing to one side of the entrance hall.
Lights flashed, gases swirled.
Zarniwoop can have it.
I don't want to play his games.
A Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Happy Vertical People Transporter took them down deep into the substrata beneath the Restaurant.
They were glad to see it had been vandalized and didn't try to make them happy as well as take them down.
At the bottom of the shaft the lift doors opened and a blast of cold stale air hit them.
The first thing they saw on leaving the lift was a long concrete wall with over fifty doors in it offering lavatory facilities for all of fifty major lifeforms.
Nevertheless, like every car park in the Galaxy throughout the entire history of car parks, this car park smelt predominantly of impatience.
They turned a corner and found themselves on a moving catwalk that traversed a vast cavernous space that stretched off into the dim distance.
It was divided off into bays each of which contained a space ship belonging to one of the diners upstairs, some smallish and utilitarian mass production models, others vast shining limoships, the playthings of the very rich.
Zaphod's eyes sparkled with something that may or may not have been avarice as he passed over them.
In fact it's best to be clear on this point-avarice is definitely what it was.
They looked where she was pointing.
Dimly they could see a small metal figure listlessly rubbing a small rag on one remote corner of a giant silver suncruiser.
At short intervals along the moving catwalk, wide transparent tubes led down to floor level.
Zaphod stepped off the catwalk into one and floated gently downwards.
The others followed.
Thinking back to this later, Arthur Dent thought it was the single most enjoyable experience of his travels in the Galaxy.
Marvin turned, and in so far as it is possible for a totally inert metal face to look reproachfully, this is what it did.
Ford went with him.
Only Trillian and Arthur actually went up to Marvin.
The third million years I didn't enjoy at all.
He paused just long enough to make them feel they ought to say something, and then interrupted.
Trillian cleared her throat.
Again the pause.
He waited.
Trillian talked to Arthur instead.
Further down the chamber Ford Prefect had found something of which he very much liked the look, several such things in fact.
Zaphod looked and liked.
The craft they were looking at was in fact pretty small but extraordinary, and very much a rich kid's toy.
It was not much to look at.
It resembled nothing so much as a paper dart about twenty feet long made of thin but tough metal foil.
At the rear end was a small horizontal two-man cockpit.
It had a tiny charm-drive engine, which was not capable of moving it at any great speed.
The thing it did have, however, was a heat-sink.
The heat-sink had a mass of some two thousand billion tons and was contained within a black hole mounted in an electromagnetic field situated half-way along the length of the ship, and this heat-sink enabled the craft to be manoeuvred to within a few miles of a yellow sun, there to catch and ride the solar flares that burst out from its surface.
Flare-riding is one of the most exotic and exhilarating sports in existence, and those who can dare and afford it are amongst the most lionized men in the Galaxy.
It is also of course stupefyingly dangerous - those who don't die riding invariably die of sexual exhaustion at one of the Daedalus Club's Apres-Flare parties.
Ford and Zaphod looked and passed on.
Again, the star buggy was a small ship - a totally misnamed one in fact, because the one thing it couldn't manage was interstellar distances.
Basically it was a sporty planet hopper dolled up to something it wasn't.
Nice lines though.
They passed on.
The next one was a big one and thirty yards long - a coach built limoship and obviously designed with one aim in mind, that of making the beholder sick with envy.
It was wonderfully hideous.
Fie examined every inch.
Lazlar's trade mark.
Zaphod whistled appreciatively.
Ford looked round the other side.
A bursting sun - Disaster Area's trade mark.
This must be Flotblack's ship.
Lucky old bugger.
They do this terrible song you know which ends with a stuntship crashing into the sun.
Meant to be an amazing spectacle.
Zaphod's attention however was elsewhere.
FHis attention was riveted on the ship standing next to Flotblack Desiato's limo.
FHis mouths hung open.
Ford looked.
He too stood astonished.
It was a ship of classic, simple design, like a flattened salmon, twenty yards long, very clean, very sleek.
There was just one remarkable thing about it.
Zaphod said nothing.
He had simply fallen in love.
The blackness of it was so extreme that it was almost impossible to tell how close you were standing to it.
It was an emotional moment.
He bit his lip.
Zaphod moved forward to it, slowly, like a man possessed - or more accurately like a man who wanted to possess.
His hand reached out to stroke it.
His hand stopped.
His hand reached out to stroke it again.
His hand stopped again.
Ford put his hand out to feel it.
His hand stopped.
He turned to look at Ford seriously.
At least, one of his heads did - the other stayed gazing in awe at the ship.
Ford looked over his shoulder.
They gazed a little longer, till Zaphod suddenly pulled himself together.
He turned.
Slowly, laboriously, and with a million little clanking and creaking noises that he had learned to simulate, Marvin turned round to answer the summons.
Marvin trudged towards them.
Er... yes.
He was keeping at least three eyes on the entrance.
Time was short.
He walked on up to the ship, touched it, and a hatchway swung open.
Ford and Zaphod stared at the opening.
He trudged away again.
Arthur and Trillian clustered round.
In the Restaurant, things were fast approaching the moment after which there wouldn't be any more moments.
All eyes were fixed on the dome, other than those of Hotblack Desiato's bodyguard, which were looking intently at Hotblack Desiato, and those of Hotblack Desiato himself which the bodyguard had closed out of respect.
The bodyguard leaned forward over the table.
Had Hotblack Desiato been alive, he probably would have deemed this a good moment to lean back, or even go for a short walk.
His bodyguard was not a man which improved with proximity.
On account of his unfortunate condition, however, Hotblack Desiato remained totally inert.
Whenever he spoke, it looked as if the muscles on either side of his mouth were clambering over each other to get out of the way.
Hotblack Desiato, quit naturally, said nothing.
Again, quite naturally, Hotblack Desiato did not reply.
Supernaturally, however, he did.
On the table in front of him a wine glass rattled, and a fork rose an inch or so and tapped against the glass.
It settled on the table again.
The bodyguard gave a satisfied grunt.
You want to get to the next gig nice and relaxed.
There was a really big audience for it.
One of the best.
Kakrafoon.
Five-hundred seventy-six thousand and two million years ago.
The fork rose again, waggled in a non-committal sort of way and dropped again.
The bodyguard would have given Dr. Dan Streetmentioner an apoplectic attack.
Be real sorry to see it go.
If we get on down there, I'll set the black ship autopilot and we'll cruise off in the limo.
The fork tapped once in agreement, and the glass of wine mysteriously emptied itself.
The bodyguard wheeled Hotblack Desiato's chair out of the Restaurant.
He flung his arms into the air.
Behind him, the band went into a frenzy of percussion and rolling synthochords.
Max had argued with them about this but they had claimed it was in their contract that that's what they would do.
His agent would have to sort it out.
The hideous fury of destruction blazed about them - and at that moment a still small trumpet sounded as from an infinite distance.
Max's eyes swivelled round to glare at the band.
None of them seemed to be playing a trumpet.
Suddenly a wisp of smoke was swirling and shimmering on the stage next to him.
The trumpet was joined by more trumpets.
Over five hundred times Max had done this show, and nothing like this had ever happened before.
He drew back in alarm from the swirling smoke, and as he did so, a figure slowly materialized inside, the figure of an ancient man, bearded, robed and wreathed in light.
In his eyes were stars and on his brow a golden crown.
At the back of the Restaurant the stony-faced party from the Church of the Second Coming of the Great Prophet Zarquon leapt ecstatically to their feet chanting and crying.
Max blinked in amazement.
He threw up his arms to the audience.
He has come!
Thunderous applause broke out as Max strode across the stage and handed his microphone to the Prophet.
Zarquon coughed.
He peered round at the assembled gathering.
The stars in his eyes blinked uneasily.
He handled the microphone with confusion.
Er, look, I'm sorry I'm a bit late.
He seemed nervous of the expectant awed hush.
He cleared his throat.
Chapter 19 One of the major selling point of that wholly remarkable travel book, the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, apart from its relative cheapness and the fact that it has the words DON'T PANIC written in large friendly letters on its cover, is its compendious and occasionally accurate glossary.
The statistics relating to the geo-social nature of the Universe, for instance, are deftly set out between pages nine hundred and thirty-eight thousand and twenty-four and nine hundred and thirty-eight thousand and twenty-six; and the simplistic style in which they are written is partly explained by the fact that the editors, having to meet a publishing deadline, copied the information off the back of a packet of breakfast cereal, hastily embroidering it with a few footnoted in order to avoid prosecution under the incomprehensibly tortuous Galactic Copyright laws.
It is interesting to note that a later and wilier editor sent the book backwards in time through a temporal warp, and then successfully sued the breakfast cereal company for infringement of the same laws.
Here is a sample: The Universe - some information to help you live in it. l~Area: Infinite.
Infinity is just so big that by comparison, bigness itself looks really titchy.
Gigantic multiplied by colossal multiplied by staggeringly huge is the sort of concept we're trying to get across here.
2~lmports: None.
It is impossible to import things into an infinite area, there being no outside to import things in from.
3~Exports: None.
See imports.
4~Population: None.
It is known that there are an infinite number of worlds, simply because there is an infinite amount of space for them to be in.
However, not every one of them is inhabited.
Therefore, there must be a finite number of inhabited worlds.
Any finite number divided by infinity is as near to nothing as makes no odds, so the average population of all the planets in the Universe can be said to be zero.
From this it follows that the population of the whole Universe is also zero, and that any people you may meet from time to time are merely the products of a deranged imagination.
5~Monetary Units: None.
In fact there are three freely convertible currencies in the Galaxy, but none of them count.
The Altairan Dollar has recently collapsed, the Flaninian Pobble Bead is only exchangeable for other Flaninian Pobble Beads, and the Triganic Pu has its own very special problems.
Its exchange rate of eight Ningis to one Pu is simple enough, but since a Ningi is a triangular rubber coin six thousand eight hundred miles across each side, no one has ever collected enough to own one Pu.
Ningis are not negotiable currency because the Galactibanks refuse to deal in fiddling small change.
From this basic premise it is very simple to prove that the Galactibanks are also the product of a deranged imagination.
6~Art: None.
The function of art is to hold the mirror up to nature, and there simply isn't a mirror big enough - see point one.
7~Sex: None.
Well, in fact there is an awful lot of this, largely because of the total lack of money, trade, banks, art, or anything else that might keep all the non-existent people of the Universe occupied.
However, it is not worth embarking on a long discussion of it now because it really is terribly complicated.
For further information see Guide chapters seven, nine, ten, eleven, fourteen, sixteen, seventeen, nineteen, twenty-one to eighty-four inclusive, and in fact most of the rest of the Guide.
Chapter 20 The Restaurant continued existing, but everything else had stopped.
Temporal relastatics held it and protected it in a nothingness that wasn't merely a vacuum, it was simply nothing - there was nothing in which a vacuum could be said to exist.
The force-shielded dome had once again been rendered opaque, the party was over, the diners were leaving, Zarquon had vanished along with the rest of the Universe, the Time Turbines were preparing to pull the Restaurant back across the brink of time in readiness for the lunch sitting, and Max Quordlepleen was back in his small curtained dressing room trying to raise his agent on the tempophone.
In the car park stood the black ship, closed and silent.
In to the car park came the late Mr. Hotblack Desiato, propelled along the moving catwalk by his bodyguard.
They descended one of the tubes.
As they approached the limoship a hatchway swung down from its side, engaged the wheels of the wheelchair and drew it inside.
The bodyguard followed, and having seen his boss safely connected up to his death-support system, moved up to the small cockpit.
Here he operated the remote control system which activated the autopilot in the black ship lying next to the limo, thus causing great relief to Zaphod Beeblebrox who had been trying to start the thing for over ten minutes.
The black ship glided smoothly forward out of its bay, turned, and moved down the central causeway swiftly and quietly.
At the end it accelerated rapidly, flung itself into the temporal launch chamber and began the long journey back into the distant past.
The Milliways Lunch Menu quotes, by permission, a passage from the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
The passage is this: The History of every major Galactic Civilization tends to pass through three distinct and recognizable phases, those of Survival, Inquiry and Sophistication, otherwise known as the How, Why and Where phases.
The Menu goes on to suggest that Milliways, the Restaurant at the End of the Universe, would be a very agreeable and sophisticated answer to that third question.
What it doesn't go on to say is that though it will usually take a large civilization many thousands of years to pass through the How, Why and Where phases, small social groupings under stressful conditions can pass through them with extreme rapidity.
The ship was rocking and swaying sickeningly as Ford and Zaphod tried to wrest control from the autopilot.
The engined howled and whined like tired children in a supermarket.
What is this?
The walls of the swaying cabin were also black, the ceiling was black, the seats - which were rudimentary since the only important trip this ship was designed for was supposed to be unmanned - were black, the control panel was black, the instruments were black, the little screws that held them in place were black, the thin tufted nylon floor covering was black, and when they had lifted up a corner of it they had discovered that the foam underlay also was black.
In fact, though they weren't to know it, the decor had been chosen in honour of its owner's sad, lamented, and tax-deductible condition.
The ship gave a particularly sickening lurch.
Zaphod left the controls for Ford to figure out, and lurched over to Arthur.
Like the mice said, it's worth a lot of money in the right quarters.
Think about it.
The Meaning of Life!
We get our fingers on that we can hold every shrink in the Galaxy up to ransom, and that's worth a bundle.
Arthur took a deep breath without much enthusiasm.
How should I know?
They say the Ultimate Answer or whatever is Forty-two, how am I supposed to know what the question is?
It could be anything.
Zaphod looked at him hard for a moment.
Then his eyes blazed with excitement.
Arthur wiped his palm across his forehead.
Zaphod's faces fell.
Oh never mind.
A low voice echoed dully round the cabin.
Ford called out from the controls he was still fighting a losing battle with.
Arthur stared in astonishment.
Marvin's head swivelled back to her.
At that moment the ship suddenly stopped rocking and swaying, the engine pitch settled down to a gentle hum.
If it is what I think it is, and if it's saying what I think it's saying, then we've already gone too far back into the past.
Zaphod shrugged.
Therefore theft is property.
Zaphod strode over to the console.
He got no further.
Several things happened at once.
The ship dropped out of time travel mode and re-emerged into real space.
All the controls on the console, which had been shut down for the time trip now lit up.
A large vision screen above the console winked into life revealing a wide starscape and a single very large sun dead ahead of them.
None of these things, however, were responsible for the fact that Zaphod was at the same moment hurled bodily backwards against the rear of the cabin, as were all the others.
They were hurled back by a single thunderous clap of noise that thuddered out of the monitor speakers surrounding the vision screen.
Chapter 21 Down on the dry, red world of Kakrafoon, in the middle of the vast Rudlit Desert, the stage technicians were testing the sound system.
That is to say, the sound system was in the desert, not the stage technicians.
They had retreated to the safety of Disaster Area's giant control ship which hung in orbit some four hundred miles above the surface of the planet, and they were testing the sound system from there.
Anyone within five miles of the speaker silos wouldn't have survived the tuning up.
If Arthur Dent had been within five miles of the speaker silos then his expiring thought would have been that in both size and shape the sound rig closely resembled Manhattan.
Risen out of the silos, the neutron phase speaker stacks towered monstrously against the sky, obscuring the banks of plutonium reactors and seismic amps behind them.
Buried deep in concrete bunkers beneath the city of speakers lay the instruments that the musicians would control from their ship, the massive photon-ajuitar, the bass detonator and the Megabang drum complex.
It was going to be a noisy show.
Aboard the giant control ship, all was activity and bustle.
Hotblack Desiato's limoship, a mere tadpole beside it, had arrived and docked, and the lamented gentleman was being transported down the high vaulted corridors to meet the medium who was going to interpret his psychic impulses on to the ajuitar keyboard.
A doctor, a logician and a marine biologist had also just arrived, flown in at phenomenal expense from Maximegalon to try to reason with the lead singer who had locked himself in the bathroom with a bottle of pills and was refusing to come out till it could be proved conclusively to him that he wasn't a fish.
The bass player was busy machine-gunning his bedroom and the drummer was nowhere on board.
Frantic inquiries led to the discovery that he was standing on a beach on Santraginus V over a hundred light years away where, he claimed, he had been happy over half an hour now and had found a small stone that would be his friend.
The band's manager was profoundly relieved.
It meant that for the seventeenth time on this tour the drums would be played by a robot and that therefore the timing of the cymbalistics would be right.
The sub-ether was buzzing with the communications of the stage technicians testing the speaker channels, and this it was that was being relayed to the interior of the black ship.
Its dazed occupants lay against the back wall of the cabin, and listened to the voices on the monitor speakers.
Another thumping crack of noise walloped through the ship.
A third voice cut in.
Gonna be a great sundive.
A computer voice answered.
Zaphod leaped across the cabin and switched frequencies on the sub-ether receiver before the next mind-pulverizing noise hit them.
He stood there quivering.
Sun...
Dive.
It's very simple to understand.
On a different frequency, the sub-ether receiver had picked up a public broadcast, which now echoed round the cabin.
Behind me the speaker stacks rise like a sheer cliff face, and high above me the sun is shining away and doesn't know what's going to hit it.
The environmentalist lobby do know what's going to hit it, and they claim that the concert will cause earthquakes, tidal waves, hurricanes, irreparable damage to the atmosphere, and all the usual things that environmentalists usually go on about.
Zaphod switched it off.
He turned to Ford.
His first theory was that if human beings didn't keep exercising their lips, their mouths probably seized up.
In fact, this second theory is more literally true of the Belcebron people of Kakrafoon.
The Belcebron people used to cause great resentment and insecurity amongst neighboring races by being one of the most enlightened, accomplished, and above all quiet civilizations in the Galaxy.
As a punishment for this behaviour, which was held to be offensively self righteous and provocative, a Galactic Tribunal inflicted on them that most cruel of all social diseases, telepathy.
Consequently, in order to prevent themselves broadcasting every slightest thought that crossed their minds to anyone within a five mile radius, they now have to talk very loudly and continuously about the weather, their little aches and pains, the match this afternoon and what a noisy place Kakrafoon had suddenly become.
Another method of temporarily blotting out their minds is to play host to a Disaster Area concert.
The timing of the concert was critical.
The ship had to begin its dive before the concert began in order to hit the sun six minutes and thirty-seven seconds before the climax of the song to which it related, so that the light of the solar flares had time to travel out to Kakrafoon.
The ship had already been diving for several minutes by the time that Ford Prefect had completed his search of the other compartments of the black ship.
He burst back into the cabin.
The sun of Kakrafoon loomed terrifyingly large on the vision screen, its blazing white inferno of fusing hydrogen nuclei growing moment by moment as the ship plunged onwards, unheeding the thumping and banging of Zaphod's hands on the control panel.
Arthur and Trillian had the fixed expressions of rabbits on a night road who think that the best way of dealing with approaching headlights is to stare them out.
Zaphod span round, wild-eyed.
Zaphod gibbered.
Ford goggled.
They said it was a great honour.
Ford pushed Arthur aside and leaned forward over the control console.
There was a moment's cold silence.
Arthur was stumbling round the back of the cabin.
Fie stopped suddenly.
Another moment passed.
Slowly, the others turned to face him.
In the pandemonium that instantly followed, the only action to follow was that of Ford Prefect lunging across the cabin to the small black box that Arthur had indicated and stabbing repeatedly at the single small black button set into it.
A six-foot square panel slid open beside it revealing a compartment which resembled a multiple shower unit that had found a new function in life as an electrician's junk store.
Half-finished wiring hung from the ceiling, a jumble of abandoned components lay strewn on the floor, and the programming panel lolled out of the cavity in the wall into which it should have been secured.
A junior Disaster Area accountant, visiting the shipyard where this ship was being constructed, had demanded to know of the works foreman why the hell they were fitting an extremely expensive teleport into a ship which only had one important journey to make, and that unmanned.
The foreman had explained that the teleport was available at a ten percent discount and the accountant had explained that this was immaterial; the foreman had explained that it was the finest, most powerful and sophisticated teleport that money could buy and the accountant had explained that the money did not wish to buy it; the foreman had explained that people would still need to enter and leave the ship and the accountant had explained that the ship sported a perfectly serviceable door; the foreman had explained that the accountant could go and boil his head and the accountant had explained to the foreman that the thing approaching him rapidly from his left was a knuckle sandwich.
After a moment or so Ford told him to stand back.
He tossed a coin into the teleport and jiggled a switch on the lolling control panel.
With a crackle and spit of light, the coin vanished.
The sun of Kakrafoon loomed huge on the screen.
We couldn't all go.
A solemn moment shuffled past.
The sun loomed larger and larger.
A shortish while later, the concert on Kakrafoon reached an unexpected climax.
The black ship with its single morose occupant had plunged on schedule into the nuclear furnace of the sun.
Massive solar flares licked out from it millions of miles into space, thrilling and in a few cases spilling the dozen or so Flare Riders who had been coasting close to the surface of the sun in anticipation of the moment.
Moments before the flare light reached Kakrafoon the pounding desert cracked along a deep faultline.
A huge and hitherto undetected underground river lying far beneath the surface gushed to the surface to be followed seconds later by the eruption of millions of tons of boiling lava that flowed hundreds of feet into the air, instantaneously vaporizing the river both above and below the surface in an explosion that echoed to the far side of the world and back again.
Those-very few-who witnessed the event and survived swear that the whole hundred thousand square miles of the desert rose into the air like a mile-thick pancake, flipped itself over and fell back down.
At that precise moment the solar radiation from the flares filtered through the clouds of vaporized water and struck the ground.
A year later, the hundred thousand square mile desert was thick with flowers.
The structure of the atmosphere around the planet was subtly altered.
The sun blazed less harshly in the summer, the cold bit less bitterly in the winter, pleasant rain fell more often, and slowly the desert world of Kakrafoon became a paradise.
Even the telepathic power with which the people of Kakrafoon had been cursed was permanently dispersed by the force of the explosion.
A few sceptical scientists examined the records of the events more closely, and claimed that they had discovered faint vestiges of a vast artificially induced Improbability Field drifting in from a nearby region of space.
Chapter 22 Arthur woke up and instantly regretted it.
Hangovers he'd had, but never anything on this scale.
This was it, this was the big one, this was the ultimate pits.
Matter transference beams, he decided, were not as much fun as, say, a good solid kick in the head.
Being for the moment unwilling to move on account of a dull stomping throb he was experiencing, he lay a while and thought.
The trouble with most forms of transport, he thought, is basically one of them not being worth all the bother.
On Earth - when there had been an Earth, before it was demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass - the problem had been with cars.
The disadvantages involved in pulling lots of black sticky slime from out of the ground where it had been safely hidden out of harm's way, turning it into tar to cover the land with, smoke to fill the air with and pouring the rest into the sea, all seemed to outweigh the advantages of being able to get more quickly from one place to another - particularly when the place you arrived at had probably become, as a result of this, very similar to the place you had left, i.e. covered with tar, full of smoke and short offish And what about matter transference beams?
Any form of transport which involved tearing you apart atom by atom, flinging those atoms through the sub-ether, and then jamming them back together again just when they were getting their first taste of freedom for years had to be bad news.
Many people had thought exactly this before Arthur Dent and had even gone to the lengths of writing songs about it.
Here is one that used regularly to be chanted by huge crowds outside the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation Teleport Systems factory on Happi-Werld III: Aldebaran's great, OK, Algol's pretty neat, Betelgeuse's pretty girls, Will knock you off your feet.
They'll do anything you like, Real fast and then real slow, But if you have to take me apart to get me there, Then I don't want to go.
Singing, Take me apart, take me apart.
What a way to roam.
And if you have to take me apart to get me there, I'd rather stay at home.
I'll gladly take the high road Or even take the low, But if you have to take me apart to get me there, Then I, for one, won't go.
Singing, Take me apart, take me apart.
You must be off your head, And if you try to take me apart to get me there, I'll stay right here in bed.
... and so on.
Another favorite song was much shorter: I teleported home one night.
With Ron and Sid and Meg, Ron stole Meggie's heart away, And I got Sidney's leg.
Arthur felt the waves of pain slowly receding, though he was aware of a dull stomping throb.
Slowly, carefully, he stood up.
Arthur span round and wobbled uncertainly.
Ford Prefect was approaching looking red eyed and pasty.
Ford looked around.
They were standing in a long curving corridor which stretched out of sight in both directions.
The outer steel wall - which was painted in that sickly shade of pale green which they use in schools, hospitals and mental asylums to keep the inmates subdued - curved over the tops of their heads where it met the inner perpendicular wall which, oddly enough was covered in dark brown hessian wall weave.
The floor was of dark green ribbed rubber.
Ford moved over to a very thick dark transparent panel set in the outer wall.
It was several layers deep, yet through it he could see pinpoints of distant stars.
Down the corridor came the sound of a dull stomping throb.
Ford shrugged.
They could be anywhere.
An unprogrammed teleport can throw you light years in any direction.
Arthur turned this thought over in his mind, reluctantly saw the wisdom of it, tucked it up and put it away.
Fie took a deep breath.
That stomping throb.
Pounding feet.
Arthur listened.
The noise echoed round the corridor at them from an indeterminate distance.
It was the muffled sound of pounding footsteps, and it was noticeably louder.
They both moved-in opposite directions.
They both stopped.
They both turned.
They both listened intently.
They both agreed with each other.
They both set off into opposite directions again.
Fear gripped them.
From both directions the noise was getting louder.
A few yards to their left another corridor ran at right angles to the inner wall.
They ran to it and hurried along it.
It was dark, immensely long and, as they passed down it, gave them the impression that it was getting colder and colder.
Other corridors gave off it to the left and right, each very dark and each subjecting them to sharp blasts of icy air as they passed.
They stopped for a moment in alarm.
The further down the corridor they went, the louder became the sound of pounding feet.
They pressed themselves back against the cold wall and listened furiously.
The cold, the dark and the drumming of disembodied feet was getting to them badly.
Ford shivered, partly with the cold, but partly with the memory of stories his favourite mother used to tell him when he was a mere slip of a Betelgeusian, ankle high to an Arcturan Megagrasshopper: stories of dead ships, haunted hulks that roamed restlessly round the obscurer regions of deep space infested with demons or the ghosts of forgotten crews; stories too of incautious travellers who found and entered such ships; stories of... - then Ford remembered the brown hessian wall weave in the first corridor and pulled himself together.
Flowever ghosts and demons may choose to decorate their death hulks, he thought to himself, he would lay any money you liked it wasn't with hessian wall weave.
Fie grasped Arthur by the arm.
A moment later they leap like startled lizards down the nearest corridor junction as the owners of the drumming feet suddenly hove into view directly in front of them.
Hidden behind the corner they goggled in amazement as about two dozen overweight men and women pounded past them in track suits panting and wheezing in a manner that would make a heart surgeon gibber.
Ford Prefect stared after them.
The corridor they were concealed in was not like the others.
It was very short, and ended at a large steel door.
Ford examined it, discovered the opening mechanism and pushed it wide.
The first thing that hit their eyes was what appeared to be a coffin.
And the next four thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine things that hit their eyes were also coffins.
Chapter 23 The vault was low ceilinged, dimly lit and gigantic.
At the far end, about three hundred yards away an archway let through to what appeared to be a similar chamber, similarly occupied.
Ford Prefect let out a low whistle as he stepped down on to the floor of the vault.
On closer inspection the coffins seemed to be more like sarcophagi.
They stood about waist high and were constructed of what appeared to be white marble, which is almost certainly what it was - something that only appeared to be white marble.
The tops were semi- translucent, and through them could dimly be perceived the features of their late and presumably lamented occupants.
They were humanoid, and had clearly left the troubles of whatever world it was they came from far behind them, but beyond that little else could be discerned.
Rolling slowly round the floor between the sarcophagi was a heavy, oily white gas which Arthur at first thought might be there to give the place a little atmosphere until he discovered that it also froze his ankles.
The sarcophagi too were intensely cold to the touch.
Ford suddenly crouched down beside one of them.
Fie pulled a corner of his towel out of his satchel and started to rub furiously at something.
He rubbed the frost clear and examined the engraved characters.
To Arthur they looked like the footprints of a spider that had had one too many of whatever it is that spiders have on a night out, but Ford instantly recognized an early form of Galactic Eezeereed.
Ford peered through the top at the figure within.
He scampered over to another sarcophagus.
The next sarcophagus revealed itself to be the last resting place of an advertising account executive; the one after that contained a second-hand car salesman, third class.
An inspection hatch let into the floor suddenly caught Ford's attention, and he squatted down to unfasten it, thrashing away at the clouds of freezing gas that threatened to envelope him.
A thought occurred to Arthur.
The gas poured down through it.
Ford stuck his head down through the floor hatchway.
He looked up again.
Standing silhouetted in the doorway through which they had entered the vault was the man who wasn't pleased to see them.
His displeasure was communicated partly by the barking hectoring quality of his voice and partly by the viciousness with which he waved a long silver Kill-O-Zap gun at them.
The designer of the gun had clearly not been instructed to beat about the bush.
Make it totally clear to anyone standing at the wrong end that things are going badly for them.
If that means sticking all sort of spikes and prongs and blackened bits all over it then so be it.
Ford and Arthur looked at the gun unhappily.
The man with the gun moved from the door and circled round them.
As he came into the light they could see his black and gold uniform on which the buttons were so highly polished that they shone with an intensity that would have made an approaching motorist flash his lights in annoyance.
He gestured at the door.
People who can supply that amount of fire power don't need to supply verbs as well.
Ford and Arthur went out, closely followed by the wrong end of the Kill-O-Zap gun and the buttons.
Turning into the corridor they were jostled by twenty-four oncoming joggers, now showered and changed, who swept on past them into the vault.
Arthur turned to watch them in confusion.
Arthur moved.
Ford shrugged and moved.
In the vault the joggers went to twenty-four empty sarcophagi along the side wall, opened them, climbed in, and fell into twenty- four dreamless sleeps.
High up in the bridge of the ship, the Captain stared out into the infinite reaches of space with mild irritation.
From where he reclined beneath a wide domed bubble he could see before and above them the vast panorama of stars through which they were moving - a panorama that had thinned out noticably during the course of the voyage.
Turning and looking backwards, over the vast two-mile bulk of the ship he could see the far denser mass of stars behind them which seemed to form almost a solid band.
This was the view through the Galactic centre from which they were travelling, and indeed had been travelling for years, at a speed that he couldn't quite remember at the moment, but he knew it was terribly fast.
It was something approaching the speed of something or other, or was it three times the speed of something else?
Jolly impressive anyway.
He peered into the bright distance behind the ship, looking for something.
He did this every few minutes or so, but never found what he was looking for.
He didn't let it worry him though.
The scientist chaps had been very insistent that everything was going to be perfectly alright providing nobody panicked and everybody got on and did their bit in an orderly fashion.
He wasn't panicking.
As far as he was concerned everything was going splendidly.
He dabbed at his shoulder with a large frothy sponge.
It crept back into his mind that he was feeling mildly irritated about something.
Now what was all that about?
A slight cough alerted him to the fact that the ship's first officer was still standing nearby.
Nice chap, Number One.
Not of the very brightest, had the odd spot of difficulty doing up his shoe laces, but jolly good officer material for all that.
The Captain wasn't a man to kick a chap when he was bending over trying to do up his shoe laces, however long it took him.
Ah yes, that was the thing that had been irritating him.
He peered down at Number One.
The Captain thought about this.
Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent trudged onwards up the ship's apparently endless corridors.
Number Two marched behind them barking the occasional order about not making any false moves or trying any funny stuff.
They seemed to have passed at least a mile of continuous brown hessian wall weave.
Finally they reached a large steel door which slid open when Number Two shouted at it.
They entered.
To the eyes of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent, the most remarkable thing about the ship's bridge was not the fifty foot diameter hemispherical dome which covered it, and through which the dazzling display of stars shone down on them: to people who have eaten at the Restaurant at the End of the Universe, such wonders are commonplace.
Nor was it the bewildering array of instruments that crowded the long circumferential wall around them.
To Arthur this was exactly what spaceships were traditionally supposed to look like, and to Ford it looked thoroughly antiquated: it confirmed his suspicions that Disaster Area's stuntship had taken them back at least a million, if not two million, years before their own time.
No, the thing that really caught them off balance was the bath.
The bath stood on a six foot pedestal of rough hewn blue water crystal and was of a baroque monstrosity not often seen outside the Maximegalon Museum of Diseased Imaginings.
An intestinal jumble of plumbing had been picked out in gold leaf rather than decently buried at midnight in an unmarked grave; the taps and shower attachment would have made a gargoyle jump.
As the dominant centrepiece of a starship bridge it was terribly wrong, and it was with the embittered air of a man who knew this that Number Two approached it.
A large genial face and a genial foam covered arm popped up above the rim of the monstrous bath.
Number Two snapped even further to attention than he already was.
Ford and Arthur coughed in confusion.
The Captain beamed at them.
So Number Two had really found some prisoners.
Well, good for him, thought the Captain, nice to see a chap doing what he's best at.
Well, jynnan tonnyx all round then.
It is a curious fact, and one to which no one knows quite how much importance to attach, that something like 85% of all known worlds in the Galaxy, be they primitive or highly advanced, have invented a drink called jynnan tonnyx, or gee-N'N-T'N-ix, or jinond-o-nicks, or any one of a thousand or more variations on the same phonetic theme.
What can be made of this fact?
It exists in total isolation.
As far as any theory of structural linguistics is concerned it is right off the graph, and yet it persists.
Old structural linguists get very angry when young structural linguists go on about it.
Young structural linguists get deeply excited about it and stay up late at night convinced that they are very close to something of profound importance, and end up becoming old structural linguists before their time, getting very angry with the young ones.
Structural linguistics is a bitterly divided and unhappy discipline, and a large number of its practitioners spend too many nights drowning their problems in Ouisghian Zodahs.
Number Two stood before the Captain's bathtub trembling with frustration.
The Captain peered at him in bemusement.
The Captain looked at them doubtfully.
A hard cold gleam came into Number Two's eyes.
He advanced slowly on Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent.
He jabbed Ford with the Kill-O-Zap gun.
Arthur blinked.
Number Two's eyes narrowed and became what are known in the Shouting and Killing People trade as cold slits, the idea presumably being to give your opponent the impression that you have lost your glasses or are having difficulty keeping awake.
Why this is frightening is an, as yet, unresolved problem.
Again, tricky to know why this is understood as fighting behaviour.
If, whilst wandering through the jungle of Traal, you were suddenly to come upon the fabled Ravenous Bugblatter Beast, you would have reason to be grateful if its mouth was a thin hard line rather than, as it usually is, a gaping mass of slavering fangs.
The Captain squirmed in his bath.
He gave Ford Prefect a lame smile.
Ford slowly lowered his hands.
It provoked no reaction.
Arthur lowered his.
Treading very slowly and carefully, Ford moved over to the bath pedestal.
He patted it.
He wondered if it was safe to grin.
Very slowly and carefully, he grinned.
It was safe.
A hand tapped him on the shoulder.
He span round.
It was the first officer.
He and Arthur took their jynnan tonnyx.
Arthur sipped his, and was surprised to discover it tasted very like a whisky and soda.
Ford paused and thought to himself.
Never take anything for granted, he thought.
Could it be that the Captain doesn't know he's got fifteen million dead bodies on his ship?
The Captain was nodding cheerfully at him.
He also appeared to be playing with a rubber duck.
Ford looked around.
Number Two was staring at him in the mirror, but only for an instant: his eyes were constantly on the move.
The first officer was just standing there holding the drinks tray and smiling benignly.
Ford licked his lips.
The Captain stared at him.
Suddenly he threw back his head and laughed.
Ford did something he very rarely did.
He blinked.
Arthur seemed to come out of a trance.
Hairdressers, tired TV producers, insurance salesmen, personnel officers, security guards, public relations executives, management consultants, you name them.
Ford wobbled very slightly.
Arthur obliged, and a cascade of pink frothy water swirled around the bath.
The Captain let out a sigh of pleasure.
Ford tossed down his drink, took the bottle from the first officer's tray and refilled his glass to the top.
Flaving told this much of his story, he settled back with a satisfied grunt.
So it was decided to build three ships, you see, three Arks in Space, and...
Number Two's eyes darted feverishly about the room again and then settled back on the mirror, like a pair of flies briefly distracted from their favourite prey of months old meat.
The Captain thought for a moment.
He fished around and found it.
He smiled happily at them.
Ford and Arthur shuffled their feet and furiously avoided each other's eyes.
Or maybe it was that the moon was going to crash into us.
Something of the kind.
Number Two span around, eyes ablaze with a cold hard light that only comes with the amount of practise he was prepared to put in.
For a moment the Captain did not answer.
Fie twisted round in his bath and gazed backwards over the huge bulk of the ship towards the bright galactic centre.
Fie squinted into the inconceivable distance.
Fie peered off into the distance again.
Ford peered with him and gave a thoughtful frown.
Flis eyes passed over the solid shapes of the instruments and computers that lined the bridge.
They winked away innocently at him.
Fie stared out at the stars, but none of them said a word.
Fie glanced at his first and second officers, but they seemed lost in their own thoughts for a moment.
Fie glanced at Ford Prefect who raised his eyebrows at him.
It's probably time I was getting out of this bath in fact.
There was a terribly good reason for it which I can't quite remember at the moment.
Ford exploded.
Chapter 25 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has this to say about the planet of Golgafrincham: It is a planet with an ancient and mysterious history, rich in legend, red, and occasionally green with the blood of those who sought in times gone by to conquer her; a land of parched and barren landscapes, of sweet and sultry air heady with the scent of the perfumed springs that trickle over its hot and dusty rocks and nourish the dark and musty lichens beneath; a land of fevered brows and intoxicated imaginings, particularly amongst those who taste the lichens; a land also of cool and shaded thoughts amongst those who have learnt to forswear the lichens and find a tree to sit beneath; a land also of steel and blood and heroism; a land of the body and of the spirit.
This was its history.
And in all this ancient and mysterious history, the most mysterious figures of all were without doubt those of the Great Circling Poets of Arium.
These Circling Poets used to live in remote mountain passes where they would lie in wait for small bands of unwary travellers, circle round them, and throw rocks at them.
And when the travellers cried out, saying why didn't they go away and get on with writing some poems instead of pestering people with all this rock-throwing business, they would suddenly stop, and then break into one of the seven hundred and ninety-four great Song Cycles of Vassilian.
These songs were all of extraordinary beauty, and even more extraordinary length, and all fell into exactly the same pattern.
The first part of each song would tell how there once went forth from the City of Vassilian a party of five sage princes with four horses.
The princes, who are of course brave, noble and wise, travel widely in distant lands, fought giant ogres, pursue exotic philosophies, take tea with weird gods and rescue beautiful monsters from ravening princesses before finally announcing that they have achieved enlightenment and that their wanderings are therefore accomplished.
The second, and much longer, part of each song would then tell of all their bickerings about which one of them is going to have to walk back.
All this lay in the planet's remote past.
It was, however, a descendant of one of these eccentric poets who invented the spurious tales of impending doom which enabled the people of Golgafrincham to rid themselves of an entire useless third of their population.
The other two-thirds stayed firmly at home and lived full, rich and happy lives until they were all suddenly wiped out by a virulent disease contracted from a dirty telephone.
Chapter 26 That night the ship crash-landed on to an utterly insignificant little green-blue planet which circled a small unregarded yellow sun in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the Western spiral arm of the Galaxy.
In the hours preceding the crash Ford Prefect had fought furiously but in vain to unlock the controls of the ship from their pre-ordained flight path.
It had quickly become apparent to him that the ship had been programmed to convey its payload safely, in uncomfortably, to its new home but to cripple itself beyond repair in the process.
Its screaming, blazing descent through the atmosphere had stripped away most of its superstructure and outer shielding, and its final inglorious bellyflop into a murky swamp had left its crew only a few hours of darkness during which to revive and offload its deep- frozen and unwanted cargo for the ship began to settle almost at once, slowly upending its gigantic bulk in the stagnant slime.
Once or twice during the night it was starkly silhouetted against the sky as burning meteors - the detritus of its descent - flashed across the sky.
In the grey pre-dawn light it let out an obscene roaring gurgle and sank for ever into the stinking depths.
When the sun came up that morning it shed its thin watery light over a vast area heaving with wailing hairdressers, public relations executives, opinion pollsters and the rest, all clawing their way desperately to dry land.
A less strong minded sun would probably have gone straight back down again, but it continued to climb its way through the sky and after a while the influence of its warming rays began to have some restoring effect on the feebly struggling creatures.
Countless numbers had, unsurprisingly, been lost to the swamp in the night, and millions more had been sucked down with the ship, but those that survived still numbered hundreds of thousands and as the day wore on they crawled out over the surrounding countryside, each looking for a few square feet of solid ground on which to collapse and recover from their nightmare ordeal.
Two figures moved further afield.
From a nearby hillside Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent watched the horror of which they could not feel a part.
Ford scraped a stick along the ground and shrugged.
Ford gave a loud, very hollow laugh.
Arthur looked at him as if he'd gone mad and, seeing nothing to indicate the contrary, realized that it would be perfectly reasonable to assume that this had in fact happened.
A curious look came into his eyes as they passed over the landscape and then settles again on the scene of misery below them.
Arthur looked up sharply.
Ford shrugged.
Arthur followed his pointing finger.
Down amongst the sprawling masses a figure was moving - or perhaps lurching would be a more accurate description.
Fie appeared to be carrying something on his shoulder.
As he lurched from prostrate form to prostrate form he seemed to wave whatever the something was at them in a drunken fashion.
After a while he gave up the struggle and collapsed in a heap.
Arthur had no idea what this was meant to mean to him.
Fie sat a while in silence.
After a while this seemed to require comment.
Looking over his shoulder Arthur saw that he was twiddling with knobs on a small box.
Ford had already introduced this box as a Sub- Etha Sens-O-Matic, but Arthur had merely nodded absently and not pursued the matter.
In his mind the Universe still divided into two parts - the Earth, and everything else.
The Earth having been demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass meant that this view of things was a little lopsided, but Arthur tended to cling to that lopsidedness as being his last remaining contact with his home.
Sausage, thought Arthur to himself as he gazed listlessly at the primitive world about him, what I wouldn't give for a good Earth sausage.
This sounded like month-old news to him.
It may be some freak standing wave effect in the planet's magnetic field - in which case we just travel round and round till we find a clear reception area.
He picked up his gear and strode off.
Arthur looked down the hill.
The man with the movie camera had struggled back up to his feet just in time to film one of his colleagues collapsing.
Arthur picked a blade of grass and strode off after Ford.
Zaphod opened some eyes and glowered at him.
He staggered to his feet and stomped off to find a chair to slump into.
He found one and slumped into it.
Zaphod said nothing.
He got up again and marched over to a small cabinet from which he pulled a bottle of old Janx spirit.
He took a long pull at it.
Chapter 28 The major problem - one of the major problems, for there are several - one of the many major problems with governing people is that of whom you get to do it; or rather of who manages to get people to let them do it to them.
To summarize: it is a well known fact, that those people who most want to rule people are, ipso facto, those least suited to do it.
To summarize the summary: anyone who is capable of getting themselves made President should on no account be allowed to do the job.
To summarize the summary of the summary: people are a problem.
And so this is the situation we find: a succession of Galactic Presidents who so much enjoy the fun and palaver of being in power that they very rarely notice that they're not.
And somewhere in the shadows behind them - who?
Who can possibly rule if no one who wants to do it can be allowed to?
Chapter 29 On a small obscure world somewhere in the middle of nowhere in particular - nowhere, that is, that could ever be found, since it is protected by a vast field of unprobability to which only six men in this galaxy have a key - it was raining.
It was bucketing down, and had been for hours.
It beat the top of the sea into a mist, it pounded the trees, it churned and slopped a stretch of scrubby land near the sea into a mudbath.
The rain pelted and danced on the corrugated iron roof of the small shack that stood in the middle of this patch of scrubby land.
It obliterated the small rough pathway that led from the shack down to the seashore and smashed apart the neat piles of interesting shells which had been placed there.
The noise of the rain on the roof of the shack was deafening within, but went largely unnoticed by its occupant, whose attention was otherwise engaged.
He was a tall shambling man with rough straw-coloured hair that was damp from the leaking roof.
His clothes were shabby, his back was hunched, and his eyes, though open, seemed closed.
In his shack was an old beaten-up armchair, an old scratched table, an old mattress, some cushions and a stove that was small but warm.
There was also an old and slightly weatherbeaten cat, and this was currently the focus of the man's attention.
He bent his shambling form over it.
The cat seemed undecided on the matter.
It pawed rather condescendingly at the piece offish the man was holding out, and then got distracted by a piece of dust on the floor.
Doubt crept into his voice.
He proffered the fish again.
He sighed.
He left the fish on the floor for the cat, and retired to his seat.
He picked up from the table a piece of paper and the stub of a pencil.
He held one in one hand and the other in the other, and experimented with the different ways of bringing them together.
He tried holding the pencil under the paper, then over the paper, then next to the paper.
He tried wrapping the paper round the pencil, he tried rubbing the stubby end of the pencil against the paper and then he tried rubbing the sharp end of the pencil against the paper.
It made a mark, and he was delighted with the discovery, as he was every day.
He picked up another piece of paper from the table.
This had a crossword on it.
He studied it briefly and filled in a couple of clues before losing interest.
He tried sitting on one of his hands and was intrigued by the feel of the bones of his hip.
Or so I imagine I'm told.
When the men come, or when in my mind the men come in their six black ships, do they come in your mind too?
He looked at the cat, which was more concerned with getting the fish down as rapidly as possible than it was with these speculations.
What do their voices mean to you?
He reflected on this, and saw the flaw in the supposition.
He paused again.
Sometimes he would pause for days, just to see what it was like.
There's mud on the floor, cigarettes and whisky on the table, fish on a plate for you and a memory of them in my mind.
Hardly conclusive evidence I know, but then all evidence is circumstantial.
He reached over to the table and pulled some things off it.
He played with the calculator for an hour, whilst the cat went to sleep and the rain outside continued to pour.
Eventually he put the calculator aside.
Or so it seems to me.
From the table he picked up a cigarette and lit it with a spill from the stove.
He inhaled deeply and sat back.
I've never seen a big white one, just the six black ones.
And the six green ones.
And the others who say they come from so far away.
Never a big white one.
Perhaps six small black ones can look like one big white one at certain times.
Perhaps I would like a glass of whisky.
He stood up and found a glass that was lying on the floor by the mattress.
He poured in a measure from his whisky bottle.
He sat again.
A hundred yards away, pelted by the torrential rain, lay the Heart of Gold.
Its hatchway opened, and three figures emerged, huddling into themselves to keep the rain off their faces.
They hurried through the pouring rain, and arrived, wet through, at the door.
They knocked.
They shivered.
The door opened.
The man smiled at him.
Zaphod looked at him in astonishment.
They went in.
They looked around the tiny shack, Zarniwoop with slight distaste, Trillian with interest, Zaphod with delight.
The man looked at them doubtfully.
Why, do you think I should have one?
He invited Trillian to sit in the chair.
He sat on the edge of the chair, Zarniwoop leaned stiffly against the table and Zaphod lay on the mattress.
He tickled the cat.
Zarniwoop pulled some notes out of a pocket.
Zarniwoop ticked off a note on the paper.
Zarniwoop looked at him in puzzlement.
This wasn't exactly what he had been expecting.
Zarniwoop stared at him.
The steam began to rise from his sodden clothes.
The man answered quickly.
Zaphod laughed happily.
He leaped up and handed the bottle to the ruler of the Universe, who took it with pleasure.
He handed the bottle to Trillian.
The rain continued to pound the roof.
Inside the shack it was warm.
The ruler of the Universe thought for a long while whilst Zarniwoop quivered with anger.
Zarniwoop still quivered, but was silent.
The man shrugged and picked up his cat.
I've never met all these people you speak of.
And neither, I suspect, have you.
They only exist in words we hear.
It is folly to say you know what is happening to other people.
Only they know, if they exist.
She left and walked into the rain.
They walked off into the rain.
Inside, Zarniwoop continued.
The ruler of the Universe waited for as long as he could.
When he heard the faint sound of the ship's engines starting he spoke to cover it.
It merely pleases me to behave in a certain way to what appears to be a cat.
Do you behave any differently?
Zarniwoop heaved a thoroughly dissatisfied sigh and looked about.
There was no ship.
The rain continued to churn the mud.
There was no sign to show where the ship had been.
He hollered into the rain.
He turned and ran back to the shack and found it locked.
The ruler of the Universe dozed lightly in his chair.
After a while he played with the pencil and the paper again and was delighted when he discovered how to make a mark with the one on the other.
Various noises continued outside, but he didn't know whether they were real or not.
He then talked to his table for a week to see how it would react.
Chapter 30 The stars came out that night, dazzling in their brilliance and clarity.
Ford and Arthur had walked more miles than they had any means of judging and finally stopped to rest.
The night was cool and balmy, the air pure, the Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic totally silent.
A wonderful stillness hung over the world, a magical calm which combined with the soft fragrances of the woods, the quiet chatter of insects and the brilliant light of the stars to soothe their jangled spirits.
Even Ford Prefect, who had seen more worlds than he could count on a long afternoon, was moved to wonder if this was the most beautiful he had ever seen.
All that day they had passed through rolling green hills and valleys, richly covered with grasses, wild scented flowers and tall thickly leaved trees, the sun had warmed them, light breezes had kept them cool, and Ford Prefect had checked his Sub-Etha Sens-O- Matic at less and less frequent intervals, and had exhibited less and less annoyance at its continued silence.
Fie was beginning to think he liked it here.
Cool though the night air was they slept soundly and comfortably in the open and awoke a few hours later with the light dewfall feeling refreshed but hungry.
Ford had stuffed some small rolls into his satchel at Milliways and they breakfasted off those before moving on.
So far they had wandered purely at random, but now they struck out firmly eastwards, feeling that if they were going to explore this world they should have some clear idea of where they had come from and where they were going.
Shortly before noon they had their first indication that the world they had landed on was not an uninhabited one: a half glimpsed face amongst the trees, watching them.
It vanished at the moment they both saw it, but the image they were both left with was of a humanoid creature, curious to see them but not alarmed.
Flalf an hour later they glimpsed another such face, and ten minutes after that another.
A minute later they stumbled into a wide clearing and stopped short.
Before them in the middle of the clearing stood a group of about two dozen men and women.
They stood still and quiet facing Ford and Arthur.
Around some of the women huddled some small children and behind the group was a ramshackle array of small dwellings made of mud and branches.
Ford and Arthur held their breath.
The tallest of the men stood a little over five feet high, they all stooped forward slightly, had longish arms and lowish foreheads, and clear bright eyes with which they stared intently at the strangers.
Seeing that they carried no weapons and made no move towards them.
Ford and Arthur relaxed slightly.
For a while the two groups simply stared at each other, neither side making any move.
The natives seemed puzzled by the intruders, and whilst they showed no sign of aggression they were quite clearly not issuing any invitations.
For a full two minutes nothing continued to happen.
After two minutes Ford decided it was time something happened.
The women drew their children slightly closer to them.
The men made hardly any discernible move and yet their whole disposition made it clear that the greeting was not welcome - it was not resented in any great degree, it was just not welcome.
One of the men, who had been standing slightly forward of the rest of the group and who might therefore have been their leader, stepped forward.
His face was quiet and calm, almost serene.
This caught Arthur by surprise.
Fie had grown so used to receiving an instantaneous and unconscious translation of everything he heard via the Babel Fish lodged in his ear that he had ceased to be aware of it, and he was only reminded of its presence now by the fact that it didn't seem to be working.
Vague shadows of meaning had flickered at the back of his mind, but there was nothing he could get any firm grasp on.
Fie guessed, correctly as it happens, that these people had as yet evolved no more than the barest rudiments of language, and that the Babel Fish was therefore powerless to help.
He glanced at Ford, who was infinitely more experienced in these matters.
A moment later, a gesture from the man-creature seemed to confirm this.
Slowly and watchfully they walked round the perimeter of the clearing.
This seemed to go down very well with the natives who bowed to them very slightly and then went about their business.
Ford and Arthur continued their journey through the wood.
A few hundred yards past the clearing they suddenly came upon a small pile of fruit lying in their path - berries that looked remarkably like raspberries and blackberries, and pulpy, green skinned fruit that looked remarkably like pears.
So far they had steered clear of the fruit and berries they had seen, though the trees and bushed were laden with them.
Therefore the point at which to start toying with them is when you're going to die if you don't.
That way you stay ahead.
They looked at the pile that lay in their path with suspicion.
It looked so good it made them almost dizzy with hunger.
The leaf-dappled sun gleamed on the pulp skins of the things which looked like pears.
The things which looked like raspberries and strawberries were fatter and riper than any Arthur had ever seen, even in ice cream commercials.
Either it's good or it's bad, either they want to feed us or to poison us.
If it's poisonous and we don't eat it they'll just attack us some other way.
Hesitantly, Arthur picked up one of those things that looked like pears.
Tree.
Apple.
Arthur took a bite from the thing which looked like a pear.
A few moments later, when they had eaten the lot, Ford Prefect turned round and called out.
They went on their way.
For the next fifty miles of their journey eastward they kept on finding the occasional gift of fruit lying in their path, and though they once or twice had a quick glimpse of a native man-creature amongst the trees, they never again made direct contact.
They decided they rather liked a race of people who made it clear that they were grateful simply to be left alone.
The fruit and berries stopped after fifty miles, because that was where the sea started.
Flaving no pressing calls on their time they built a raft and crossed the sea.
It was reasonably calm, only about sixty miles wide and they had a reasonably pleasant crossing, landing in a country that was at least as beautiful as the one they had left.
Life was, in short, ridiculously easy and for a while at least they were able to cope with the problems of aimlessness and isolation by deciding to ignore them.
When the craving for company became too great they would know where to find it, but for the moment they were happy to feel that the Golgafrinchans were hundreds of miles behind them.
Nevertheless, Ford Prefect began to use his Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic more often again.
Only once did he pick up a signal, but that was so faint and from such enormous distance that it depressed him more than the silence that had otherwise continued unbroken.
On a whim they turned northwards.
After weeks of travelling they came to another sea, built another raft and crossed it.
This time it was harder going, the climate was getting colder.
Arthur suspected a streak of masochism in Ford Prefect - the increasing difficulty of the journey seemed to give him a sense of purpose that was otherwise lacking.
Fie strode onwards relentlessly.
Their journey northwards brought them into steep mountainous terrain of breathtaking sweep and beauty.
The vast, jagged, snow covered peaks ravished their senses.
The cold began to bite into their bones.
They wrapped themselves in animal skins and furs which Ford Prefect acquired by a technique he once learned from a couple of ex- Pralite monks running a Mind-Surfing resort in the Hills of Hunian.
The galaxy is littered with ex-Pralite monks, all on the make, because the mental control techniques the Order have evolved as a form of devotional discipline are, frankly, sensational - and extraordinary numbers of monks leave the Order just after they have finished their devotional training and just before they take their final vows to stay locked in small metal boxes for the rest of their lives.
Ford's technique seemed to consist mainly of standing still for a while and smiling.
After a while an animal - a deer perhaps - would appear from out of the trees and watch him cautiously.
Ford would continue to smile at it, his eyes would soften and shine, and he would seem to radiate a deep and universal love, a love which reached out to embrace all of creation.
A wonderful quietness would descend on the surrounding countryside, peaceful and serene, emanating from this transfigured man.
Slowly the deer would approach, step by step, until it was almost nuzzling him, whereupon Ford Prefect would reach out to it and break its neck.
Chapter 31 A few days after landing in this mountainous land they hit a coastline which swept diagonally before them from the south-west to the north-east, a coastline of monumental grandeur: deep majestic ravines, soaring pinnacles of ice-fjords.
For two further days they scrambled and climbed over the rocks and glaciers, awe-struck with beauty.
It was the afternoon of the second day.
Arthur was sitting on a high rock watching the thundering sea smashing itself against the craggy promontories.
Arthur looked to where Ford's voice had come from, carried faintly in the wind.
Ford had gone to examine a glacier, and Arthur found him there crouching by the solid wall of blue ice.
Fie was tense with excitement - his eyes darted up to meet Arthur's.
Arthur looked.
Fie saw the solid wall of blue ice.
Ford was pointing deep into the heart of the ice.
Arthur peered - he saw nothing but vague shadows.
Arthur moved back and looked again.
And suddenly he saw it.
Fie saw it.
His mouth started to speak, but his brain decided it hadn't got anything to say yet and shut it again.
His brain then started to contend with the problem of what his eyes told it they were looking at, but in doing so relinquished control of the mouth which promptly fell open again.
Once more gathering up the jaw, his brain lost control of his left hand which then wandered around in an aimless fashion.
For a second or so the brain tried to catch the left hand without letting go of the mouth and simultaneously tried to think about what was buried in the ice, which is probably why the legs went and Arthur dropped restfully to the ground.
The thing that had been causing all this neural upset was a network of shadows in the ice, about eighteen inches beneath the surface.
Looked at it from the right angle they resolved into the solid shapes of letters from an alien alphabet, each about three feet high; and for those, like Arthur, who couldn't read Magrathean there was above the letters the outline of a face hanging in the ice.
It was an old face, thin and distinguished, careworn but not unkind.
It was the face of the man who had won an award for designing the coastline they now knew themselves to be standing on.
Chapter 32 A thin whine filled the air.
It whirled and howled through the trees upsetting the squirrels.
A few birds flew off in disgust.
The noise danced and skittered round the clearing.
It whooped, it rasped, it generally offended.
The Captain, however, regarded the lone bagpiper with an indulgent eye.
Little could disturb his equanimity; indeed, once he had got over the loss of his gorgeous bath during that unpleasantness in the swamp all those months ago he had begun to find his new life remarkably congenial.
A hollow had been scooped out of a large rock which stood in the middle of the clearing, and in this he would bask daily whilst attendants sloshed water over him.
Not particularly warm water, it must be said, as they hadn't yet worked out a way of heating it.
Never mind, that would come, and in the meantime search parties were scouring the countryside far and wide for a hot spring, preferably one in a nice leafy glade, and if it was near a soap mine - perfection.
To those who said that they had a feeling soap wasn't found in mines, the Captain had ventured to suggest that perhaps that was because no one had looked hard enough, and this possibility had been reluctantly acknowledged.
No, life was very pleasant, and the greatest thing about it was that when the hot spring was found, complete with leafy glade en suite, and when in the fullness of time the cry came reverberating across the hills that the soap mine had been located and was producing five hundred cakes a day it would be more pleasant still.
It was very important to have things to look forward to.
Wail, wail, screech, wail, howl, honk, squeak went the bagpipes, increasing the Captain's already considerable pleasure at the thought that any moment now they might stop.
That was something he looked forward to as well.
What else was pleasant, he asked himself?
Well, so many things: the red and gold of the trees, now that autumn was approaching; the peaceful chatter of scissors a few feet from his bath where a couple of hairdressers were exercising their skills on a dozing art director and his assistant; the sunlight gleaming off the six shiny telephones lined up along the edge of his rock-hewn bath.
Nicest of all was the happy murmur of all the hundreds of people slowly assembling in the clearing around him to watch the afternoon committee meeting.
The Captain punched his rubber duck playfully on the beak.
The afternoon committee meetings were his favourite.
Other eyes watched the assembling crowds.
High in a tree on the edge of the clearing squatted Ford Prefect, lately returned from foreign climes.
After his six month journey he was lean and healthy, his eyes gleamed, he wore a reindeer-skin coat; his beard was as thick and his face as bronzed as a country-rock singer's.
He and Arthur Dent had been watching the Golgafrinchans for almost a week now, and Ford had decided to stir things up a bit.
The clearing was now full.
Hundreds of men and women lounged around, chatting, eating fruit, playing cards and generally having a fairly relaxed time of it.
Their track suits were now all dirty and even torn, but they all had immaculately styled hair.
Ford was puzzled to see that many of them had stuffed their track suits full of leaves and wondered if this was meant to be some form of insulation against the coming winter.
Ford's eyes narrowed.
They couldn't be interested in botany of a sudden could they?
In the middle of these speculations the Captain's voice rose above the hubbub.
He smiled genially.
The talking gradually died away and the clearing fell silent, except for the bagpiper who seemed to be in some wild and uninhabitable musical world of his own.
A few of those in his immediate vicinity threw some leaves to him.
If there was any reason for this then it escaped Ford Prefect for the moment.
A small group of people had clustered round the Captain and one of them was clearly beginning to speak.
He did this by standing up, clearing his throat and then gazing off into the distance as if to signify to the crowd that he would be with them in a minute.
The crowd of course were riveted and all turned their eyes on him.
A moment of silence followed, which Ford judged to be the right dramatic moment to make his entry.
The man turned to speak.
Ford dropped down out of the tree.
The crowd swivelled round.
Or a lighter?
It wasn't what he'd prepared.
He decided he'd better be a little stronger on the subject.
Ford refused to be headed off.
Ford smiled a broad country-rock singer smile.
Ford looked round the crowd.
The management consultant decided that testiness was what the situation now called for.
A girl with a strident voice leapt to her feet and used it.
Fie plonked himself down on the ground to see how long he could keep his temper.
The Captain made a sort of conciliatory harrumphing noise.
Ten seconds, thought Ford as he leapt to his feet again.
What are you going to do?
Nervously, the hairdresser fished in his track suit top and handed over the fruits of his labour to Ford.
Ford held them up for all to see.
The crowd applauded.
The crowd hadn't the faintest idea what he was talking about, but they loved it nevertheless.
They applauded.
The crowd were tense.
They were expecting something wonderful from Ford.
Ford asked the crowd.
They didn't know, they just thought it was great.
What do you mean, difficulty?
The marketing girl soured him with a look.
The crowd went wild.
One up to the home team, they thought.
Ford shrugged his shoulders and sat down again.
As if in answer to his question there was a sudden clamour of noise from the entrance to the clearing.
The crowd couldn't believe the amount of entertainment they were getting this afternoon: in marched a squad of about a dozen men dressed in the remnants of their Golgafrincham 3rd Regiment dress uniforms.
About half of them still carried Kill-O-Zap guns, the rest now carried spears which they struck together as they marched.
They looked bronzed, healthy, and utterly exhausted and bedraggled.
They clattered to a halt and banged to attention.
One of them fell over and never moved again.
Number Two strode through the crowd and presented arms before the bath.
Number Two turned to face the crowd.
He raised his gun above his head.
This is going to be great, thought the crowd.
Wild abandoned cheering broke out in all corners of the clearing - this was beyond all expectation.
He leapt to his feet and demanded silence.
After a while he got it, or at least the best silence he could hope for under the circumstances: the circumstances were that the bagpiper was spontaneously composing a national anthem.
Ford considered opening this idea up for debate but quickly decided that that way madness lay.
Instead he slung a well judged rock at the piper and turned to face Number Two.
Number Two gazed contemptuously at Ford Prefect.
Total warfare!
Ah, interesting, thought the crowd, nice point.
Number Two's gaze hovered undisturbed.
In this respect his eyes were like a couple of mosquitos that hover purposefully three inches from your nose and refuse to be deflected by arm thrashes, fly swats or rolled newspapers.
The Captain leaned forward out of his bath.
For a moment the eyes wavered.
The moment of uncertainty passed - his eyes flickered like whips over his audience.
He flipped his Kill-O-Zap gun smartly under his arm and marched off through the pandemonium that had now erupted throughout the ecstatic crowd.
A few steps was all he managed before he was caught up and carried shoulder high for a lap of honour round the clearing.
Ford sat and idly tapped a couple of stones together.
Ford rounded on him angrily.
On their journey back.
Ford and Arthur had come across two derelict villages and the bodies of many natives in the woods, where they had crept away to die.
Those that still lived were stricken and listless, as if they were suffering some disease of the spirit rather than the body.
They moved sluggishly and with an infinite sadness.
Their future had been taken away from them.
Ford ignored him, and appealed to the whole crowd.
The Captain hummed and hahed about this for a moment.
Fie held the duck aloft and it got an appreciative round from the crowd.
All the while, the Management Consultant had been sitting in stony silence, his finger tips pressed to his temples to indicate that he was waiting and would wait all day if it was necessary.
At this point he decided he would not wait all day after all, he would merely pretend that the last half hour hadn't happened.
He rose to his feet.
The Management Consultant gave him a look that only a lungfish could have copied.
Ford nodded dejectedly.
Ford stared in disbelief at the crowd who were murmuring appreciatively at this and greedily fingering the wads of leaves with which their track suits were stuffed.
Murmurs of alarm came from the crowd.
The Management Consultant waved them down.
The crowd seemed a little uncertain about this for a second or two until someone pointed out how much this would increase the value of the leaves in their pockets whereupon they let out whoops of delight and gave the Management Consultant a standing ovation.
The accountants amongst them looked forward to a profitable Autumn.
The tide of opinion started to turn against him.
What had started out as excellent entertainment had now, in the crowd's view, deteriorated into mere abuse, and since this abuse was in the main directed at them they wearied of it.
Sensing this shift in the wind, the marketing girl turned on him.
Well have I got news for you, my love.
Ford waited for this statement to have its effect.
It didn't have any.
They didn't know what he was talking about.
He continued.
Burn down the forests, anything, it won't make a scrap of difference.
Your future history has already happened.
Two million years you've got and that's it.
At the end of that time your race will be dead, gone and good riddance to you.
The crowd muttered to itself in annoyance.
People as rich as they had suddenly become shouldn't be obliged to listen to this sort of gibberish.
Perhaps they could tip the fellow a leaf or two and he would go away.
They didn't need to bother.
Ford was already stalking out of the clearing, pausing only to shake his head at Number Two who was already firing his Kill-O-Zap gun into some neighbouring trees.
Fie turned back once.
Could someone pass me the sponge?
Chapter 33 A mile or so away through the wood, Arthur Dent was too busily engrossed with what he was doing to hear Ford Prefect approach.
What he was doing was rather curious, and this is what it was: on a wide flat piece of rock he had scratched out the shape of a large square, subdivided into one hundred and sixty-nine smaller squares, thirteen to a side.
Furthermore he had collected together a pile of smallish flattish stones and scratched the shape of a letter on to each.
Sitting morosely round the rock were a couple of the surviving local native men whom Arthur Dent was trying to introduce the curious concept embodied in these stones.
So far they had not done well.
They had attempted to eat some of them, bury others and throw the rest of them away.
Arthur had finally encouraged one of them to lay a couple of stones on the board he had scratched out, which was not even as far as he'd managed to get the day before.
Along with the rapid deterioration in the morale of these creatures, there seemed to be a corresponding deterioration in their actual intelligence.
In an attempt to egg them along, Arthur set out a number of letters on the board himself, and then tried to encourage the natives to add some more themselves.
It was not going well.
Ford watched quietly from beside a nearby tree.
I've explained the rules to you... no no, look please, put down that jawbone... alright, we'll start again.
Ford leaned his elbow against the tree and his hand against his head.
Arthur looked up with a start.
He suddenly had a feeling that all this might look slightly foolish.
All he knew was that it had worked like a dream on him when he was a child.
But things were different then, or rather would be.
Ford let it pass.
He sighed and sat back.
Arthur burst out angrily.
He hoped that the weary sigh and then the anger might do something to counteract the overriding feeling of foolishness from which he was currently suffering.
It didn't.
He jumped to his feet.
Arthur waved his arms about hopelessly.
Arthur kicked at a stone.
You know perfectly well what it means.
It means that this planet is the Earth!
It's my home!
Why don't you tell them that?
See what they say.
Arthur absorbed this unhappily.
Fie went over to where the apemen creatures were rummaging listlessly with the stone letters.
Fie shook his head.
Arthur winced.
A terrible sense of desolation thrilled through his body that he should be here, on the Earth, the Earth which had lost its future in a horrifying arbitrary catastrophe and which now seemed set to lose its past as well.
This doesn't change the history of the Earth, you see, this is the history of the Earth.
Like it or leave it, the Golgafrinchans are the people you are descended from.
In two million years they get destroyed by the Vogons.
FHistory is never altered you see, it just fits together like a jigsaw.
Fie picked up the letter Q and hurled it into a distant pivet bush where it hit a young rabbit.
The rabbit hurtled off in terror and didn't stop till it was set upon and eaten by a fox which choked on one of its bones and died on the bank of a stream which subsequently washed it away.
During the following weeks Ford Prefect swallowed his pride and struck up a relationship with a girl who had been a personnel officer on Golgafrincham, and he was terribly upset when she suddenly passed away as a result of drinking water from a pool that had been polluted by the body of a dead fox.
The only moral it is possible to draw from this story is that one should never throw the letter Q into a pivet bush, but unfortunately there are times when it is unavoidable.
Like most of the really crucial things in life, this chain of events was completely invisible to Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent.
They were looking sadly at one of the natives morosely pushing the other letters around.
The wretched creature let out a pathetic howling noise and banged on the rock.
The native banged on the rock again.
They looked over his shoulder.
Their eyes popped.
There amongst the jumble of letters were eight that had been laid out in a clear straight line.
They spelt two words.
He swept the letters angrily away and went and mooched under a nearby tree with his colleague.
Ford and Arthur stared at him.
Then they stared at each other.
Arthur ran over to the two natives.
One of them rolled over on the ground, kicked his legs up in the air, rolled over again and went to sleep.
The other bounded up the tree and threw horse chestnuts at Ford Prefect.
Whatever it was they had to say, they had already said it.
Arthur looked around him.
Ford puzzled for a moment.
It might give us a clue though if we could find it.
They moped about for a bit.
Arthur sat on the ground and started pulling up bits of grass, but found that it wasn't an occupation he could get deeply engrossed in.
It wasn't grass he could believe in, the trees seemed pointless, the rolling hills seemed to be rolling to nowhere and the future seemed just a tunnel to be crawled through.
Ford fiddled with his Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic.
It was silent.
He sighed and put it away.
Arthur picked up one of the letter stones from his home-made Scrabble set.
It was a T. He sighed and out it down again.
The letter he put down next to it was an I. That spelt IT.
He tossed another couple of letters next to them They were an S and an H as it happened.
By a curious coincidence the resulting word perfectly expressed the way Arthur was feeling about things just then.
He stared at it for a moment.
He hadn't done it deliberately, it was just a random chance.
His brain got slowly into first gear.
Ford leapt to his feet.
He tugged his towel out of his satchel and with a few deft knots transformed it into a bag.
But we'll do it because it's brilliant nonsense.
The sun passed respectfully behind a cloud.
A few small sad raindrops fell.
They piled together all the remaining letters and dropped them into the bag.
They shook them up.
Pull them out.
Arthur closed his eyes and plunged his hand into the towelful of stones.
He jiggled them about, pulled out four and handed them to Ford.
Ford laid them along the ground in the order he got them.
He blinked.
Arthur pushed three more at him.
Doy.
Doyoug...
Arthur pulled another two from the bag.
Ford put them in place.
Arthur was throwing them out feverishly as fast as he could go.
M, U, L, T, I, P, L, Y,...
What do you get if you multiply,...
S, I, X,... six, B, Y, by, six by... what do you get if you multiply six by...
He paused.
He sat back, nonplussed.
He rooted around again in the knotted up towel but there were no more letters.
Chapter 34 The sun came out and beamed cheerfully at them.
A bird sang.
A warm breeze wafted through the trees and lifted the heads of the flowers, carrying their scent away through the woods.
An insect droned past on its way to do whatever it is that insects do in the late afternoon.
The sound of voices lilted through the trees followed a moment later by two girls who stopped in surprise at the sight of Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent apparently lying on the ground in agony, but in fact rocking with noiseless laughter.
She was the taller and slimmer of the two.
On Golgafrincham she had been a junior personnel officer, but hadn't liked it much.
Ford pulled himself together.
My friend and I were just contemplating the meaning of life.
Whatever the privations of this world were, she went to sleep every night profoundly grateful for the fact that whatever she had to face in the morning it wouldn't be a hundred almost identical photographs of moodily lit tubes of toothpaste.
For nothing.
I'm Ford, this is Arthur.
The girls looked at them doubtfully.
There was a slight pause.
Arthur smiled and looked away.
Nothing matters.
Look, it's a beautiful day, enjoy it.
Got potted straight into a black hole.
Agda and Mella exchanged glances.
Many hours later Arthur and Mella sat and watched the moon rise over the dull red glow of the trees.
She shook her head in puzzlement.
Arthur paused.
DOUGLAS ADAMS LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING for Sally Chapter 1 The regular early morning yell of horror was the sound of Arthur Dent waking up and suddenly remembering where he was.
It wasn't just that the cave was cold, it wasn't just that it was damp and smelly.
It was the fact that the cave was in the middle of Islington and there wasn't a bus due for two million years.
Time is the worst place, so to speak, to get lost in, as Arthur Dent could testify, having been lost in both time and space a good deal.
At least being lost in space kept you busy.
He was stranded in prehistoric Earth as the result of a complex sequence of events which had involved him being alternately blown up and insulted in more bizarre regions of the Galaxy than he ever dreamt existed, and though his life had now turned very, very, very quiet, he was still feeling jumpy.
He hadn't been blown up now for five years.
Since he had hardly seen anyone since he and Ford Prefect had parted company four years previously, he hadn't been insulted in all that time either.
Except just once.
It had happened on a spring evening about two years previously.
He was returning to his cave just a little after dusk when he became aware of lights flashing eerily through the clouds.
He turned and stared, with hope suddenly clambering through his heart.
Rescue.
Escape.
The castaway's impossible dream - a ship.
And as he watched, as he stared in wonder and excitement, a long silver ship descended through the warm evening air, quietly, without fuss, its long legs unlocking in a smooth ballet of technology.
It alighted gently on the ground, and what little hum it had generated died away, as if lulled by the evening calm.
A ramp extended itself.
Light streamed out.
A tall figure appeared silhouetted in the hatchway.
It walked down the ramp and stood in front of Arthur.
It was alien, very alien.
It had a peculiar alien tallness, a peculiar alien flattened head, peculiar slitty little alien eyes, extravagantly draped golden ropes with a peculiarly alien collar design, and pale grey-green alien skin which had about it that lustrous shine which most grey-green faces can only acquire with plenty of exercise and very expensive soap.
Arthur boggled at it.
It gazed levelly at him.
Arthur's first sensations of hope and trepidation had instantly been overwhelmed by astonishment, and all sorts of thoughts were battling for the use of his vocal chords at this moment.
He was feeling the effects of having not said anything to anybody for as long as he could remember.
The alien creature frowned briefly and consulted what appeared to be some species of clipboard which he was holding in his thin and spindly alien hand.
Arthur nodded helplessly.
The creature nodded to itself, made a peculiar alien tick on its clipboard and turned briskly back towards the ship.
It marched up the ramp, through the hatchway and disappeared into the ship.
The ship sealed itself.
It started to make a low throbbing hum.
What?
The ship rose, as if shedding its weight like a cloak to the ground, and hovered briefly.
It swept strangely up into the evening sky.
It passed up through the clouds, illuminating them briefly, and then was gone, leaving Arthur alone in an immensity of land dancing a helplessly tiny little dance.
What?
Hey, what?
He jumped and danced until his legs trembled, and shouted till his lungs rasped.
There was no answer from anyone.
There was no one to hear him or speak to him.
The alien ship was already thundering towards the upper reaches of the atmosphere, on its way out into the appalling void which separates the very few things there are in the Universe from each other.
Its occupant, the alien with the expensive complexion, leaned back in its single seat.
His name was Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged.
He was a man with a purpose.
Not a very good purpose, as he would have been the first to admit, but it was at least a purpose and it did at least keep him on the move.
Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged was - indeed, is - one of the Universe's very small number of immortal beings.
Those who are born immortal instinctively know how to cope with it, but Wowbagger was not one of them.
Indeed he had come to hate them, the load of serene bastards.
He had had his immortality thrust upon him by an unfortunate accident with an irrational particle accelerator, a liquid lunch and a pair of rubber bands.
The precise details of the accident are not important because no one has ever managed to duplicate the exact circumstances under which it happened, and many people have ended up looking very silly, or dead, or both, trying.
Wowbagger closed his eyes in a grim and weary expression, put some light jazz on the ship's stereo, and reflected that he could have made it if it hadn't been for Sunday afternoons, he really could have done.
To begin with it was fun, he had a ball, living dangerously, taking risks, cleaning up on high-yield long-term investments, and just generally outliving the hell out of everybody.
In the end, it was the Sunday afternoons he couldn't cope with, and that terrible listlessness which starts to set in at about 2.55, when you know that you've had all the baths you can usefully have that day, that however hard you stare at any given paragraph in the papers you will never actually read it, or use the revolutionary new pruning technique it describes, and that as you stare at the clock the hands will move relentlessly on to four o'clock, and you will enter the long dark teatime of the soul.
So things began to pall for him.
The merry smiles he used to wear at other people's funerals began to fade.
He began to despise the Universe in general, and everyone in it in particular.
This was the point at which he conceived his purpose, the thing which would drive him on, and which, as far as he could see, would drive him on forever.
It was this.
He would insult the Universe.
That is, he would insult everybody in it.
And so he started out.
He equipped a spaceship that was built to last with the computer capable of handling all the data processing involved in keeping track of the entire population of the known Universe and working out the horrifically complicated routes involved.
His ship fled through the inner orbits of the Sol star system, preparing to slingshot round the sun and fling itself out into interstellar space.
Wowbagger gazed for a moment at the fantastic jewellery of the night, the billions of tiny diamond worlds that dusted the infinite darkness with light.
Every one, every single one, was on his itinerary.
Most of them he would be going to millions of times over.
He imagined for a moment his itinerary connecting up all the dots in the sky like a child's numbered dots puzzle.
He hoped that from some vantage point in the Universe it might be seen to spell a very, very rude word.
The computer beeped tunelessly to indicate that it had finished its calculations.
It beeped.
It beeped again.
It beeped again.
Wowbagger grunted.
He watched the majesty of creation outside his window for a moment or two.
The computer beeped.
The computer beeped.
The ship fled on through the night.
Meanwhile, on Earth, it began to pour with rain and Arthur Dent sat in his cave and had one of the most truly rotten evenings of his entire life, thinking of things he could have said to the alien and swatting flies, who also had a rotten evening.
The next day he made himself a pouch out of rabbit skin because he thought it would be useful to keep things in.
Chapter 2 This morning, two years later than that, was sweet and fragrant as he emerged from the cave he called home until he could think of a better name for it or find a better cave.
Though his throat was sore again from his early morning yell of horror, he was suddenly in a terrifically good mood.
He wrapped his dilapidated dressing gown tightly around him and beamed at the bright morning.
The air was clear and scented, the breeze flitted lightly through the tall grass around his cave, the birds were chirruping at each other, the butterflies were flitting about prettily, and the whole of nature seemed to be conspiring to be as pleasant as it possibly could.
It wasn't all the pastoral delights that were making Arthur feel so cheery, though.
He had just had a wonderful idea about how to cope with the terrible lonely isolation, the nightmares, the failure of all his attempts at horticulture, and the sheer futurelessness and futility of his life here on prehistoric Earth, which was that he would go mad.
He beamed again and took a bite out of a rabbit leg left over from his supper.
He chewed happily for a few moments and then decided formally to announce his decision.
He stood up straight and looked the world squarely in the fields and hills.
To add weight to his words he stuck the rabbit bone in his hair.
He spread his arms out wide.
Arthur's brain somersaulted.
His jaw did press-ups.
He grinned in what he accurately judged to be an infuriating manner.
I reckoned that if the world wanted me badly enough it would call back.
He took out of his now terribly battered and dilapidated satchel his Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic.
He shook it.
Arthur shook his head and sat down.
He looked up.
Arthur cleared his throat, and then did it again.
He waited for a reaction from Arthur, but Arthur knew better than that.
He felt very strange.
After nearly four years of total isolation he was so pleased and relieved to see Ford that he could almost cry.
Ford was, on the other hand, an almost immediately annoying person.
Arthur didn't bother to reply.
Fie gazed thoughtfully into the distance.
But you may be interested to know that I am singlehandedly responsible for the evolved shape of the animal you came to know in later centuries as a giraffe.
And I tried to learn to fly.
The FHitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
FHe smiled weakly.
Fie pointed at the knees of his trousers and held his arms up to show the elbows.
They were all torn and worn through.
He stuck out his hand.
Arthur shook his head in a sudden access of emotion and bewilderment.
I can hardly even remember how to speak.
I keep forgetting words.
I practise you see.
I practise by talking to... talking to... what are those things people think you're mad if you talk to?
We're surrounded by them for heaven's sake.
I've planted hundreds myself.
They all died.
Trees!
I practise by talking to trees.
Ford still had his hand stuck out.
Arthur looked at it with incomprehension.
Arthur did, nervously at first, as if it might turn out to be a fish.
Then he grasped it vigorously with both hands in an overwhelming flood of relief.
He shook it and shook it.
After a while Ford found it necessary to disengage.
They climbed to the top of a nearby outcrop of rock and surveyed the scene around them.
Arthur shrugged.
He stuck his hands on his hips and looked round again at the empty world.
Suddenly, there was about Ford a sense of energy and purpose.
Things are going to happen.
He lowered his voice to a whisper.
He gazed keenly into the distance and looked as if he would quite like the wind to blow his hair back dramatically at that point, but the wind was busy fooling around with some leaves a little way off.
Arthur asked him to repeat what he had just said because he hadn't quite taken his meaning.
Ford repeated it.
Arthur nodded, and then cleared his throat.
He pushed his hands into the pocket of his dressing gown and looked knowledgeably into the distance.
Ford looked angrily at him.
Ford grasped him by the lapels of his dressing gown and spoke to him as slowly and distinctly and patiently as if he were somebody from a telephone company accounts department.
Arthur looked foolishly at the cloth of his dressing gown where Ford was holding it.
Ford swept on before Arthur could turn the foolish look into a foolish remark.
They stood there alone on a hill on prehistoric Earth and stared each other resolutely in the face.
There was a quiet pause.
Which, as I explained, have mostly been with trees.
They weren't like this.
They sat down and composed their thoughts.
Ford got out his Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic.
It was making vague humming noises and a tiny light on it was flickering faintly.
Ford moved the device in a slow lightly bobbing semi-circle.
Suddenly the light flashed.
Arthur looked.
Much to his surprise, there was a velvet paisley- covered Chesterfield sofa in the field in front of them.
He boggled intelligently at it.
Shrewd questions sprang into his mind.
He scrambled rapidly down the rocky outcrop and made off across the field.
With a whoop of utterly unexpected delight he leapt down the rock and plunged off in hectic pursuit of Ford Prefect and the irrational piece of furniture.
They careered wildly through the grass, leaping, laughing, shouting instructions to each other to head the thing off this way or that way.
The sun shone dreamily on the swaying grass, tiny field animals scattered crazily in their wake.
Arthur felt happy.
He was terribly pleased that the day was for once working out so much according to plan.
Only twenty minutes ago he had decided he would go mad, and now he was already chasing a Chesterfield sofa across the fields of prehistoric Earth.
The sofa bobbed this way and that and seemed simultaneously to be as solid as the trees as it drifted past some of them and hazy as a billowing dream as it floated like a ghost through others.
Ford and Arthur pounded chaotically after it, but it dodged and weaved as if following its own complex mathematical topography, which it was.
Still they pursued, still it danced and span, and suddenly turned and dipped as if crossing the lip of a catastrophe graph, and they were practically on top of it.
With a heave and a shout they leapt on it, the sun winked out, they fell through a sickening nothingness, and emerged unexpectedly in the middle of the pitch at Lord's Cricked Ground, St John's Wood, London, towards the end of the last Test Match of the Australian Series in the year 198-, with England needing only twenty-eight runs to win.
The night sky over the planet Krikkit is the least interesting sight in the entire Universe.
Chapter 3 It was a charming and delightful day at Lord's as Ford and Arthur tumbled haphazardly out of a space-time anomaly and hit the immaculate turf rather hard.
The applause of the crowd was tremendous.
It wasn't for them, but instinctively they bowed anyway, which was fortunate because the small red heavy ball which the crowd actually had been applauding whistled mere millimetres over Arthur's head.
In the crowd a man collapsed.
They threw themselves back to the ground which seemed to spin hideously around them.
The applause of the crowd had been rapidly succeeded by gasps of astonishment, and the awkward titters of hundreds of people who could not yet make up their minds about whether to believe what they had just seen or not.
Arthur looked up.
Arthur looked again.
They remained crouched there for a few moments, frowning deeply.
The blue thing shaped like a policeman tapped them both on the shoulders.
These words had an electrifying effect on Arthur.
He leapt to his feet like an author hearing the phone ring and shot a series of startled glanced at the panorama around him which had suddenly settled down into something of quite terrifying ordinariness.
He squatted down abruptly in front of Ford.
Ford shrugged.
Ford shrugged again, and obliged.
Arthur got to his feet.
Having said this, he sauntered off towards the edge of the pitch, brushing down his dressing gown.
He then noticed his dressing gown and stopped.
He stared at it.
He flung himself at the policeman.
He collapsed and lay twitching on the grass.
Ford shook his head.
Reaction to all this from the crowd were many and various.
Most of them couldn't cope with watching it, and listened to it on the radio instead.
There was a pause while the first commentator considered this.
He didn't actually materialize, did he?
Well, that's one mystery less.
Still, it's definitely one for the record books I think, particularly occurring at this dramatic moment in play, England now needing only twenty-four runs to win the series.
The policeman turned around and wandered off in search of anyone who wasn't from Betelgeuse.
Fortunately, the ground was full of them.
Arthur's consciousness approached his body as from a great distance, and reluctantly.
It had had some bad times in there.
Slowly, nervously, it entered and settled down in to its accustomed position.
Arthur sat up.
His body flopped back on the grass.
Ten minutes later, hunched over a cup of tea in the refreshment tent, the colour started to come back to his haggard face.
He closed his eyes and greedily inhaled the steam from his tea as if it was-well, as far as Arthur was concerned, as if it was tea, which it was.
He opened his eyes again and smiled serenely.
Slowly he began to focus on the newspaper.
He cocked his head on one side with a slight frown.
His eyes wandered slowly up to the date, which Ford was idly tapping at.
His face froze for a second or two and then began to do that terribly slow crashing trick which Arctic ice - floes do so spectacularly in the spring.
He tossed back his tea.
Outside the refreshment tent, the sun was shining on a happy crowd.
It shone on white hats and red faces.
It shone on ice lollies and melted them.
It shone on the tears of small children whose ice lollies had just melted and fallen off the stick.
It shone on the trees, it flashed off whirling cricket bats, it gleamed off the utterly extraordinary object which was parked behind the sight-screens and which nobody appeared to have noticed.
It beamed on Ford and Arthur as they emerged blinking from the refreshment tent and surveyed the scene around them.
Arthur was shaking.
Ford shrugged.
He picked up an imaginary phone and dialled an imaginary dial.
Ah, hello, yes.
This is Arthur Dent speaking.
He looked at the imaginary mouthpiece in disappointment.
A glummer look replaced the already glum look on Arthur Dent's face.
The game continued.
The bowler approached the wicket at a lope, a trot, and then a run.
He suddenly exploded in a flurry of arms and legs, out of which flew a ball.
The batsman swung and thwacked it behind him over the sight-screens.
Ford's eyes followed the trajectory of the ball and jogged momentarily.
He stiffened.
He looked along the flight path of the ball again and his eyes twitched again.
He screwed his eyes up in concentration.
He covered one eye and looked with the other.
Ford was beginning to behave rather strangely, or rather not actually beginning to behave strangely but beginning to behave in a way which was strangely different from the other strange ways in which he more regularly behaved.
What he was doing was this.
Regardless of the bemused stares it was provoking from his fellow members of the crowd gathered round the pitch, he was waving his hands in sharp movements across his face, ducking down behind some people, leaping up behind others, then standing still and blinking a lot.
After a moment or two of this he started to stalk forward slowly and stealthily wearing a puzzled frown of concentration, like a leopard that's not sure whether it's just seen a half-empty tin of cat food half a mile away across a hot and dusty plain.
Ford's spell of concentration was broken.
Fie turned angrily on Arthur.
It's just that the bag into which I was putting the towel which is not mine is also not mine, though it is extraordinarily similar.
Now personally I think that that is extremely odd, especially as the bag was one I made myself on prehistoric Earth.
A roar of excitement thrilled through the crowd and obliterated whatever it was that Ford said in reply to this piece of information.
The cricket ball which had excited this reaction fell out of the sky and dropped neatly into Arthur's mysterious rabbit-skin bag.
He pointed vaguely in the direction in which he wished they would push off.
One of the boys looked at him quizzically.
Arthur prided himself on saying this.
It was, he thought, exactly the sort of thing which would entertain and stimulate young minds.
The boy looked past him at something else, to show that he wasn't in any particular hurry to run away, and then wandered off scratching his nose.
Play resumed with a new ball, the sun continued to shine and Ford continued to jump up and down shaking his head and blinking.
He pointed.
Curiously enough, the direction he pointed in was not the one in which he was looking.
Arthur looked in the one direction, which was towards the sight-screens, and in the other which was at the field of play.
He nodded, he shrugged.
He shrugged again.
He had no idea what all that was about, but at least it seemed to be over.
It wasn't.
Arthur nodded slowly, carefully and with an air of immense stupidity.
Arthur experienced that dull throbbing sensation just behind the temples which was a hallmark of so many of his conversations with Ford.
His brain lurked like a frightened puppy in its kennel.
Ford took him by the arm.
That's what SEP means.
Somebody Else's Problem.
The brain just edits it out, it's like a blind spot.
If you look at it directly you won't see it unless you know precisely what it is.
For a moment Arthur was stunned by the reaction this revelation provoked.
A roar erupted from the crowd, and from every direction people were running, shouting, yelling, tumbling over each other in a tumult of confusion.
He stumbled back in astonishment and glanced fearfully around.
Then he glanced around again in even greater astonishment.
The apparition wobbled in front of Arthur's eyes, though the truth of the matter is probably that Arthur's eyes were wobbling in front of the apparition.
His mouth wobbled as well.
Ford was staring at the tumult in trepidation.
The match.
It means they retain the Ashes.
You must be very pleased.
I must say, I'm rather fond of cricket, though I wouldn't like anyone outside this planet to hear me saying that.
The apparition gave what looked as if it might have been a mischievous grin, but it was hard to tell because the sun was directly behind him, creating a blinding halo round his head and illuminating his silver hair and beard in a way which was awesome, dramatic and hard to reconcile with mischievous grins.
Though as I said to you when we last met, I was very sorry about that.
Arthur tried to speak, but gave up the unequal struggle.
He prodded Ford again.
We ought to get out.
Ford turned away sharply at this point.
The old man ignored this and stared keenly on to the pitch, with eyes that seemed alive with expressions that had no apparent bearing on what was happening out there.
What was happening was that the crowd was gathering itself into a wide circle round the centre of the pitch.
What Slartibartfast saw in it, he alone knew.
Ford was humming something.
It was just one note repeated at intervals.
He was hoping that somebody would ask him what he was humming, but nobody did.
Fie was annoyed that nobody asked.
And there's nothing that depresses me more than seeing a planet being destroyed.
Except possibly still being on it when it happens.
All, however, that seemed to be afoot was a ceremony of some kind.
It was being specially staged for the benefit of tv rather than the spectators, and all they could gather about it from where they were standing was what they heard from a nearby radio.
Ford was aggressively uninterested.
He was marching out on to the pitch with terrible purpose in his gait, his hair, beard and robes swept behind him, looking very much as Moses would have looked if Sinai had been a well-cut lawn instead of, as it is more usually represented, a fiery smoking mountain.
They started off towards it.
Strange sounds reached their ears.
They resolved to ignore it.
What happened next they could not ignore.
Then for a while it did nothing, as if it expected everybody to go about their normal business and not mind it just hanging there.
Then it did something quite extraordinary.
Or rather, it opened up and let something quite extraordinary come out of it, eleven quite extraordinary things.
They were robots, white robots.
What was most extraordinary about them was that they appeared to have come dressed for the occasion.
Not only were they white, but they carried what appeared to be cricket bats, and not only that, but they also carried what appeared to be cricket balls, and not only that but they wore white ribbing pads round the lower parts of their legs.
Smoke and flame billowed from the pitch.
He continued to run, pausing only for a moment to grab Arthur's arm and drag him along with him.
Arthur had adopted his normal crisis role, which was to stand with his mouth hanging open and let it all wash over him.
I do not know why they are doing this, but that is what they are doing.
It would have been hard to disbelieve this without knowing a great deal more Galactic history than Arthur had so far managed to pick up in his travels.
The ghostly but violent shapes that could be seen moving within the thick pall of smoke seemed to be performing a series of bizarre parodies of batting strokes, the difference being that every ball they struck with their bats exploded wherever it landed.
The very first one of these had dispelled Arthur's initial reaction, that the whole thing might just be a publicity stunt by Australian margarine manufacturers.
And then, as suddenly as it had all started, it was over.
For a moment there was a terrible stunned silence, and then out of the drifting smoke emerged the pale figure of Slartibartfast looking even more like Moses because in spite of the continued absence of the mountain he was at least now striding across a fiery and smoking well-mown lawn.
Fie stared wildly about him until he saw the hurrying figures of Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect forcing their way through the frightened crowd which was for the moment busy stampeding in the opposite direction.
The crowd was clearly thinking to itself about what an unusual day this was turning out to be, and not really knowing which way, if any, to turn.
Slartibartfast was gesturing urgently at Ford and Arthur and shouting at them, as the three of them gradually converged on his ship, still parked behind the sight-screens and still apparently unnoticed by the crowd stampeding past it who presumably had enough of their own problems to cope with at that time.
Arthur shook his head.
Ford and Arthur shook their heads at each other.
He stopped and shouted.
They ran on.
It's a trophy.
He shook his head very slightly as if he was trying to get his brain to settle down lower in his skull.
They had arrived at it.
The second strangest thing about the ship was watching the Somebody Else's Problem field at work.
They could now clearly see the ship for what it was simply because they knew it was there.
It was quite apparent, however, that nobody else could.
This wasn't because it was actually invisible or anything hyper impossible like that.
The technology involved in making anything invisible is so infinitely complex that nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand million, nine hundred and ninety-nine million, nine hundred and ninety-nine thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine times out of a billion it is much simpler and more effective just to take the thing away and do without it.
The ultra-famous sciento-magician Effrafax of Wug once bet his life that, given a year, he could render the great megamountain Magramal entirely invisible.
Having spent most of the year jiggling around with immense Lux-O- Valves and Refracto-Nullifiers and Spectrum-Bypass-O-Matics, he realized, with nine hours to go, that he wasn't going to make it.
The Somebody Else's Problem field is much simpler and more effective, and what's more can be run for over a hundred years on a single torch battery.
This is because it relies on people's natural disposition not to see anything they don't want to, weren't expecting, or can't explain.
If Effrafax had painted the mountain pink and erected a cheap and simple Somebody Else's Problem field on it, then people would have walked past the mountain, round it, even over it, and simply never have noticed that the thing was there.
And this is precisely what was happening with Slartibartfast's ship.
It wasn't pink, but if it had been, that would have been the least of its visual problems and people were simply ignoring it like anything.
The most extraordinary thing about it was that it looked only partly like a spaceship with guidance fins, rocket engines and escape hatches and so on, and a great deal like a small upended Italian bistro.
Ford and Arthur gazed up at it with wonderment and deeply offended sensibilities.
Come, we must go.
The ancient nightmare is come again.
Doom confronts us all.
Ford and Arthur followed Slartibartfast into the ship and were so perplexed by what they saw inside it that they were totally unaware of what happened next outside.
A spaceship, yet another one, but this one sleek and silver, descended from the sky on to the pitch, quietly, without fuss, its long legs unlocking in a smooth ballet of technology.
It landed gently.
It extended a short ramp.
A tall grey-green figure marched briskly out and approached the small knot of people who were gathered in the centre of the pitch tending to the casualties of the recent bizarre massacre.
It moved people aside with quiet. understated authority, and came at last to a man lying in a desperate pool of blood, clearly now beyond the reach of any Earthly medicine, breathing, coughing his last.
The figure knelt down quietly beside him.
The man, with horrified confusion in eyes, nodded feebly.
Chapter 4 It seemed to Arthur as if the whole sky suddenly just stood aside and let them through.
It seemed to him that the atoms of his brain and the atoms of the cosmos were streaming through each other.
It seemed to him that he was blown on the wind of the Universe, and that the wind was him.
It seemed to him that he was one of the thoughts of the Universe and that the Universe was a thought of his.
It seemed to the people at Lord's Cricket Ground that another North London restaurant had just come and gone as they so often do, and that this was Somebody Else's Problem.
Arthur lay in startled stillness on the acceleration couch.
He wasn't certain whether he had just got space-sickness or religion.
For a moment or two the old man didn't reply.
He was staring at the instruments with the air of one who is trying to convert fahrenheit to centigrade in his head whilst his house is burning down.
Then his brow cleared and he stared for a moment at the wide panoramic screen in front of him, which displayed a bewildering complexity of stars streaming like silver threads around them.
His lips moved as if he was trying to spell something.
Suddenly his eyes darted in alarm back to his instruments, but then his expression merely subsided into a steady frown.
He looked back up at the screen.
He felt his own pulse.
His frown deepened for a moment, then he relaxed.
Ford glanced sharply around.
Fie clearly thought this was taking an optimistic view of things.
The interior of the flight deck was dark green, dark red, dark brown, cramped and moodily lit.
Inexplicably, the resemblance to a small Italian bistro had failed to end at the hatchway.
Small pools of light picked out pot plants, glazed tiles and all sorts of little unidentifiable brass things.
Rafia-wrapped bottles lurked hideously in the shadows.
The instruments which had occupied Slartibartfast's attention seemed to be mounted in the bottom of bottles which were set in concrete.
Ford reached out and touched it.
Fake concrete.
Plastic.
Fake bottles set in fake concrete.
The fundamental heart of mind and Universe can take a running jump, he thought to himself, this is rubbish.
On the other hand, it could not be denied that the way the ship had moved made the Fleart of Gold seem like an electric pram.
Fie swung himself off the couch.
Fie brushed himself down.
Fie looked at Arthur who was singing quietly to himself.
Fie looked at the screen and recognized nothing.
Fie looked at Slartibartfast.
Look, there's somewhere you can take us where we can have fun.
I'm trying to think of it, we can get drunk and maybe listen to some extremely evil music.
Hold on.
He dug out his copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and tipped through those parts of the index primarily concerned with sex and drugs and rock and roll.
The triple-breasted whore of Eroticon Six.
Some people say her erogenous zones start some four miles from her actual body.
What do you say, Arthur?
Stop mumbling mantras and pay attention.
Arthur pushed himself up from his couch and shook his head.
He walked towards a green wrought-iron spiral staircase set incomprehensibly in the middle of the flight deck and started to ascend.
Arthur, with a frown, followed.
Ford slung the Guide sullenly back into his satchel.
Nevertheless, he stomped up the stairs behind them.
What they found upstairs was just stupid, or so it seemed, and Ford shook his head, buried his face in his hands and slumped against a pot plant, crushing it against the wall.
As he did so, Arthur had a sudden vague flash of what it might mean, but he refused to believe it.
The Universe could not possibly work like that, he thought, cannot possibly.
That, he thought to himself, would be as absurd as... he terminated that line of thinking.
Most of the really absurd things he could think of had already happened.
And this was one of them.
It was a large glass cage, or box-in fact a room.
In it was a table, a long one.
Around it were gathered about a dozen chairs, of the bentwood style.
On it was a tablecloth - a grubby, red and white check tablecloth, scarred with the occasional cigarette burn, each, presumably, at a precise calculated mathematical position.
And on the tablecloth sat some half-eaten Italian meals, hedged about with half-eaten breadsticks and half-drunk glasses of wine, and toyed with listlessly by robots.
It was all completely artificial.
The robot customers were attended by a robot waiter, a robot wine waiter and a robot maetre d'.
The furniture was artificial, the tablecloth artificial, and each particular piece of food was clearly capable of exhibiting all the mechanical characteristics of, say, a polio sorpreso, without actually being one.
And all participated in a little dance together - a complex routine involving the manipulation of menus, bill pads, wallets, cheque books, credit cards, watches, pencils and paper napkins, which seemed to be hovering constantly on the edge of violence, but never actually getting anywhere.
Slartibartfast hurried in, and then appeared to pass the time of day quite idly with the maetre d', whilst one of the customer robots, an autorory, slid slowly under the table, mentioning what he intended to do to some guy over some girl.
Slartibartfast took over the seat which had been thus vacated and passed a shrewd eye over the menu.
The tempo of the routine round the table seemed somehow imperceptibly to quicken.
Arguments broke out, people attempted to prove things on napkins.
They waved fiercely at each other, and attempted to examine each other's pieces of chicken.
The waiter's hand began to move on the bill pad more quickly than a human hand could manage, and then more quickly than a human eye could follow.
The pace accelerated.
Soon, an extraordinary and insistent politeness overwhelmed the group, and seconds later it seemed that a moment of consensus was suddenly achieved.
A new vibration thrilled through the ship.
Slartibartfast emerged from the glass room.
He swept past and carried them bewildered in his wake.
Chapter 5 The Bistromatic Drive is a wonderful new method of crossing vast interstellar distances without all that dangerous mucking about with Improbability Factors.
Bistromathics itself is simply a revolutionary new way of understanding the behaviour of numbers.
Just as Einstein observed that time was not an absolute but depended on the observer's movement in space, and that space was not an absolute, but depended on the observer's movement in time, so it is now realized that numbers are not absolute, but depend on the observer's movement in restaurants.
The first non-absolute number is the number of people for whom the table is reserved.
This will vary during the course of the first three telephone calls to the restaurant, and then bear no apparent relation to the number of people who actually turn up, or to the number of people who subsequently join them after the show/match/party/gig, or to the number of people who leave when they see who else has turned up.
The second non-absolute number is the given time of arrival, which is now known to be one of those most bizarre of mathematical concepts, a recipriversexcluson, a number whose existence can only be defined as being anything other than itself.
In other words, the given time of arrival is the one moment of time at which it is impossible that any member of the party will arrive.
Recipriversexclusons now play a vital part in many branches of maths, including statistics and accountancy and also form the basic equations used to engineer the Somebody Else's Problem field.
The third and most mysterious piece of non-absoluteness of all lies in the relationship between the number of items on the bill, the cost of each item, the number of people at the table, and what they are each prepared to pay for.
The baffling discrepancies which used to occur at this point remained uninvestigated for centuries simply because no one took them seriously.
They were at the time put down to such things as politeness, rudeness, meanness, flashness, tiredness, emotionality, or the lateness of the hour, and completely forgotten about on the following morning.
They were never tested under laboratory conditions, of course, because they never occurred in laboratories - not in reputable laboratories at least.
And so it was only with the advent of pocket computers that the startling truth became finally apparent, and it was this: Numbers written on restaurant bills within the confines of restaurants do not follow the same mathematical laws as numbers written on any other pieces of paper in any other parts of the Universe.
This single fact took the scientific world by storm.
It completely revolutionized it.
So many mathematical conferences got held in such good restaurants that many of the finest minds of a generation died of obesity and heart failure and the science of maths was put back by years.
Slowly, however, the implications of the idea began to be understood.
The small groups of monks who had taken up hanging around the major research institutes singing strange chants to the effect that the Universe was only a figment of its own imagination were eventually given a street theatre grant and went away.
He stopped and looked about him.
The Room of Informational Illusions was a welcome relief after the visual monstrosities of the central computational area.
There was nothing in it.
No information, no illusions, just themselves, white walls and a few small instruments which looked as if they were meant to plug into something which Slartibartfast couldn't find.
He had picked up Slartibartfast's sense of urgency but didn't know what to do with it.
Slartibartfast looked at him sharply.
He resumed his search.
Arthur nodded wisely to himself.
Arthur nodded again and looked round to Ford for help, but Ford was practising being sullen and getting quite good at it.
Arthur frowned.
He could tell that he wasn't getting his point across.
Strange but true.
At that moment he located the slot in the wall for which he had been searching, and clicked the instrument he was holding into it.
They didn't hear what he said, because at that moment the ship winked out of existence around them and a starbattle-ship the size of a small Midlands industrial city plunged out of the sundered night towards them, star lasers ablaze.
They gaped, pop-eyed, and were unable to scream.
Chapter 7 Another world, another day, another dawn.
The early morning's thinnest sliver of light appeared silently.
Several billion trillion tons of superhot exploding hydrogen nuclei rose slowly above the horizon and managed to look small, cold and slightly damp.
There is a moment in every dawn when light floats, there is the possibility of magic.
Creation holds its breath.
The moment passed as it regularly did on Squornshellous Zeta, without incident.
The mist clung to the surface of the marshes.
The swamp trees were grey with it, the tall reeds indistinct.
It hung motionless like held breath.
Nothing moved.
There was silence.
The sun struggled feebly with the mist, tried to impart a little warmth here, shed a little light there, but clearly today was going to be just another long haul across the sky.
Nothing moved.
Again, silence.
Nothing moved.
Silence.
Very often on Squornshellous Zeta, whole days would go on like this, and this was indeed going to be one of them.
Fourteen hours later the sun sank hopelessly beneath the opposite horizon with a sense of totally wasted effort.
And a few hours later it reappeared, squared its shoulders and started on up the sky again.
This time, however, something was happening.
A mattress had just met a robot.
The robot stopped and looked at the mattress.
It looked at it quizzically.
It was clearly a very stupid mattress.
It looked back at him with wide eyes.
After what it had calculated to ten significant decimal places as being the precise length of pause most likely to convey a general contempt for all things mattressy, the robot continued to walk round in tight circles.
It was a large mattress, and probably one of quite high quality.
Very few things actually get manufactured these days, because in an infinitely large Universe such as, for instance, the one in which we live, most things one could possibly imagine, and a lot of things one would rather not, grow somewhere.
A forest was discovered recently in which most of the trees grew ratchet screwdrivers as fruit.
The life cycle of ratchet screwdriver fruit it quite interesting.
Once picked it needs a dark dusty drawer in which it can lie undisturbed for years.
Then one night it suddenly hatches, discards its outer skin which crumbles into dust, and emerges as a totally unidentifiable little metal object with flanges at both ends and a sort of ridge and a sort of hole for a screw.
This, when found, will get thrown away.
No one knows what it is supposed to gain from this.
Nature, in her infinite wisdom, is presumably working on it.
No one really knows what mattresses are meant to gain from their lives either.
They are large, friendly, pocket-sprung creatures which live quiet private lives in the marshes of Squornshellous Zeta.
Many of them get caught, slaughtered, dried out, shipped out and slept on.
None of them seem to mind and all of them are called Zem.
Marvin paused again in his weary circular plod.
He resumed his walk, as if inspired by this conversational outburst to fresh heights of gloom and despondency.
He plodded tenaciously.
If he had had teeth he would have gritted them at this point.
He hadn't.
He didn't.
The mere plod said it all.
The mattress flolloped around.
This is a thing that only live mattresses in swamps are able to do, which is why the word is not in more common usage.
It flolloped in a sympathetic sort of way, moving a fairish body of water as it did so.
It blew a few bubbles up through the water engagingly.
Its blue and white stripes glistened briefly in a sudden feeble ray of sun that had unexpectedly made it through the mist, causing the creature to bask momentarily.
Marvin plodded.
Stomp, stomp, he went.
The mattress globbered.
This is the noise made by a live, swamp dwelling mattress that is deeply moved by a story of personal tragedy.
The word can also, according to the Ultra-Complete Maximegalon Dictionary of Every Language Ever, mean the noise made by the Lord High Sanvalvwag of Hollop on discovering that he has forgotten his wife's birthday for the second year running.
Since there was only ever one Lord High Sanvalvwag of Hollop, and he never married, the word is only ever used in a negative or speculative sense, and there is an ever-increasing body of opinion which holds that the Ultra-Complete Maximegalon Dictionary is not worth the fleet of lorries it takes to cart its microstored edition around in.
You should be more mattresslike.
We live quiet retired lives in the swamp, where we are content to flollop and vollue and regard the wetness in a fairly floopy manner.
Some of us are killed, but all of us are called Zem, so we never know which and globbering is thus kept to a minimum.
You should tell your friends Zem and Zem when you see them later; they'll laugh, if I know them, which I don't of course - except insofar as I know all organic life forms, which is much better than I would wish to.
He stomped around again in his tiny circle, around his thin steel peg-leg which revolved in the mud but seemed otherwise stuck.
Then I might try it backwards.
The mattress could feel deep in his innermost spring pockets that the robot dearly wished to be asked how long he had been trudging in this futile and fruitless manner, and with another quiet flurble he did so.
The mattress did.
Marvin ignored the question, he merely trudged with added emphasis.
Let me give you an example.
The mattress was much impressed by this and realized that it was in the presence of a not unremarkable mind.
It willomied along its entire length, sending excited little ripples through its shallow algae- covered pool.
It gupped.
He was pointing as well as he could manage, and he obviously wanted to make it totally clear that this was as well as he could manage, through the mist, over the reeds, to a part of the marsh which looked exactly the same as every other part of the marsh.
Excitement gripped the mattress.
It had never heard of speeches being delivered on Squornshellous Zeta, and certainly not by celebrities.
Water spattered off it as a thrill glurried across its back.
It did something which mattresses very rarely bother to do.
Summoning every bit of its strength, it reared its oblong body, heaved it up into the air and held it quivering there for a few seconds whilst it peered through the mist over the reeds at the part of the marsh which Marvin had indicated, observing, without disappointment, that it was exactly the same as every other part of the marsh.
The effort was too much, and it flodged back into its pool, deluging Marvin with smelly mud, moss and weeds.
I was rescued by a scrap-metal merchant, imagine that.
He trudged savagely for a few seconds.
Hateful, isn't it?
He sold me to a Mind Zoo.
I was the star exhibit.
I had to sit on a box and tell my story whilst people told me to cheer up and think positive.
It was going to revitalize the economy of the Squornshellous System.
They spent the entire economy of the Squornshellous System building it.
They asked me to open it.
It began to rain a little, a fine spray slid through the mist.
I hate and despise you all.
Marvin paused, remembering the moment.
The mattress flurred and glurried.
It flolloped, gupped and willomied, doing this last in a particularly floopy way.
Suddenly, a moment later, the robots were back again for another violent incident, and this time when they left, the mattress was alone in the swamp.
He flolloped around in astonishment and alarm.
He almost lurgled in fear.
He reared himself to see over the reeds, but there was nothing to see, just more reeds.
He listened, but there was no sound on the wind beyond the now familiar sound of half-crazed etymologists calling distantly to each other across the sullen mire.
Chapter 8 The body of Arthur Dent span.
The Universe shattered into a million glittering fragments around it, and each particular shard span silently through the void, reflecting on its silver surface some single searing holocaust of fire and destruction.
And then the blackness behind the Universe exploded, and each particular piece of blackness was the furious smoke of hell.
And the nothingness behind the blackness behind the Universe erupted, and behind the nothingness behind the blackness behind the shattered Universe was at last the dark figure of an immense man speaking immense words.
Slartibartfast floated past, waving.
Music swelled - again, it was immense music, immense chords.
And behind the man, slowly, three tall pillars began to emerge out of the immensely swirling mist.
Think of that, my friends.
The music was going bananas with immensity at this point.
The three pillars stood out clearly now, three pillars topped with two cross pieces in a way which looked stupefyingly familiar to Arthur's addled brain.
Searchlights seared out and danced crazy dances up and down the pillar on the left which was, clearly, made of steel or something very like it.
The music thumped and bellowed.
Other searchlights played exotically up and down the righthand, transparent pillar creating dazzling patterns within it and a sudden inexplicable craving for ice-cream in the stomach of Arthur Dent.
The lights picked out the central pillar.
The music moved bravely up into the realms of complete unspeakability.
The whole structure was now flooded with dazzling lights, and the music had now, fortunately, gone far beyond the limits of the discernible.
At the top of the three pillars the two brilliantly gleaming bails sat and dazzled.
There seemed to be girls sitting on top of them, or maybe they were meant to be angels.
Angels are usually represented as wearing more than that, though.
Suddenly there was a dramatic hush in what was presumably meant to be the Cosmos, and a darkening of the lights.
Even in primitive worlds it persists in racial memories.
And with a flourish, the man produced in his hands a model of the Wikkit gate.
Scale was terribly hard to judge in this whole extraordinary spectacle, but the model looked as if it must have been about three feet high.
That, as everyone knows, was destroyed, blasted into the ever-whirling eddies of the space-time continuum and lost for ever.
Slartibartfast floated past again at this moment.
Lights came and went, the pillars disappeared, the man gabled himself backwards into nothing, the Universe snappily reassembled itself around them.
They found themselves once again teetering rather rapidly on the edge of an agonizingly high cliff.
The wind whipped out from their faces and across a bay on which the remains of one of the greatest and most powerful space battle-fleets ever assembled in the Galaxy was briskly burning itself back into existence.
The sky was a sullen pink, darkening via a rather curious colour to blue and upwards to black.
Smoke billowed down out of it at an incredible lick.
But now things were too rapid, a video-tactile blur which brushed and jiggled them through centuries of galactic history, turning, twisting, flickering.
The sound was a mere thin thrill.
Periodically through the thickening jumble of events they sensed appalling catastrophes, deep horrors, cataclysmic shocks, and these were always associated with certain recurring images, the only images which ever stood out clearly from the avalance of tumbling history: a wicket gate, a small hard red ball, hard white robots, and also something less distinct, something dark and cloudy.
But there was also another sensation which rose clearly out of the thrilling passage of time.
Just as a slow series of clicks when speeded up will lose the definition of each individual click and gradually take on the quality of a sustained and rising tone, so a series of individual impressions here took on the quality of a sustained emotion - and yet not an emotion.
If it was an emotion, it was a totally emotionless one.
It was hatred, implacable hatred.
It was cold, not like ice is cold, but like a wall is cold.
It was impersonal, not as a randomly flung fist in a crowd is impersonal, but like a computer-issued parking summons is impersonal.
And it was deadly - again, not like a bullet or a knife is deadly, but like a brick wall across a motorway is deadly.
And just as a rising tone will change in character and take on harmonics as it rises, so again, this emotionless emotion seemed to rise to an unbearable if unheard scream and suddenly seemed to be a scream of guilt and failure.
And suddenly it stopped.
They were left standing on a quiet hilltop on a tranquil evening.
The sun was setting.
All around them softly undulating green countryside rolled off gently into the distance.
Birds sang about what they thought of it all, and the general opinion seemed to be good.
A little way away could be heard the sound of children playing, and a little further away than the apparent source of that sound could be seen in the dimming evening light the outlines of a small town.
The town appeared to consist mostly of fairly low buildings made of white stone.
The skyline was of gentle pleasing curves.
The sun had nearly set.
As if out of nowhere, music began.
Slartibartfast tugged at a switch and it stopped.
Slartibartfast tugged at a switch and it stopped.
The place was peaceful.
Arthur felt happy.
Even Ford seemed cheerful.
They walked a short way in the direction of the town, and the Informational Illusion of the grass was pleasant and springy under their feet, and the Informational Illusion of the flowers smelt sweet and fragrant.
Only Slartibartfast seemed apprehensive and out of sorts.
He stopped and looked up.
It suddenly occurred to Arthur that, coming as this did at the end, so to speak, or rather the beginning of all the horror they had just blurredly experienced, something nasty must be about to happen.
He was distressed to think that something nasty could happen to somewhere as idyllic as this.
He too glanced up.
There was nothing in the sky.
He realized that this was merely a recording he was walking through, but he still felt alarmed.
This is the place itself.
He stared up into the sky.
The sky, from one horizon to another, from east to west, from north to south, was utterly and completely black.
Chapter 9 Stomp stomp.
Whirrr.
Stomp stomp stomp stomp stomp.
Whirrr.
Stomp stomp stomp stomp.
Whirrr.
Stomp stomp stomp stomp.
Zaphod stopped stomping.
It was not the sort of thing doors said.
Too concise.
Furthermore, there were not enough doors.
It was dark.
Most of the ship's non-essential systems were closed down.
It was drifting in a remote area of the Galaxy, deep in the inky blackness of space.
It was all in deep shadow.
There were just the very dim pinkish outlines of the doors which glowed in the dark and pulsed whenever they spoke, though he had tried every way he could think of stopping them.
The lights were off so that his heads could avoid looking at each other, because neither of them was currently a particularly engaging sight, and nor had they been since he had made the error of looking into his soul.
It had indeed been an error.
It had been late one night - of course.
It had been a difficult day - of course.
There had been soulful music playing on the ship's sound system - of course.
And he had, of course, been slightly drunk.
In other words, all the usual conditions which bring on a bout of soul-searching had applied, but it had, nevertheless, clearly been an error.
Standing now, silent and alone in the dark corridor he remembered the moment and shivered.
His one head looked one way and his other the other and each decided that the other was the way to go.
He listened but could hear nothing.
He started nervously to edge his way in the direction of the bridge.
There at least he would feel in control.
He stopped again.
The way he was feeling he didn't think he was an awfully good person to be in control.
The first shock of that moment, thinking back, had been discovering that he actually had a soul.
In fact he'd always more or less assumed that he had one as he had a full complement of everything else, and indeed two of somethings, but suddenly actually to encounter the thing lurking there deep within him had giving him a severe jolt.
Then he had thought about what his position actually was and the renewed shock had nearly made him spill his drink.
He drained it quickly before anything serious happened to it.
He then had another quick one to follow the first one down and check that it was all right.
Trillian came on to the bridge at that point and said several enthusiastic things on the subject of freedom.
He looked uncertainly at both of her and preferred the one on the right.
He poured a drink down his other throat with the plan that it would head the previous one off at the pass, join forces with it, and together they would get the second to pull itself together.
Then all three would go off in search of the first, give it a good talking to and maybe a bit of a sing as well.
He felt uncertain as to whether the fourth drink had understood all that, so he sent down a fifth to explain the plan more fully and a sixth for moral support.
His heads collided trying to sort out the four of her he could now see into a whole position.
He gave up and looked at the navigation screen and was astonished to see a quite phenomenal number of stars.
He boggled at her.
He had never seen anyone sit on their own lap before.
He had another drink.
He grunted.
There seemed to be a terrific party going on in his stomach.
Trillian raised her eyebrows.
He paused.
Whilst he slept it off, Trillian did a little research in the ship's copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
It had some advice to offer on drunkenness.
It was cross-referenced to the entry concerning the size of the Universe and ways of coping with that.
Then she found the entry on Han Wavel, an exotic holiday planet, and one of the wonders of the Galaxy.
Han Wavel is a world which consists largely of fabulous ultra-luxury hotels and casinos, all of which have been formed by the natural erosion of wind and rain.
The chances of this happening are more or less one to infinity against.
Little is known of how this came about because none of the geophysicists, probability statisticians, meteoranalysts or bizzarrologists who are so keen to research it can afford to stay there.
Terrific, thought Trillian to herself, and within a few hours the great white running-shoe ship was slowly powering down out of the sky beneath a hot brilliant sun towards a brightly coloured sandy spaceport.
The ship was clearly causing a sensation on the ground, and Trillian was enjoying herself.
She heard Zaphod moving around and whistling somewhere in the ship.
After an hour or two it became plain that he meant it and the ship returned to the sky without having once opened its hatchway.
Trillian nodded patiently, tapped her fingers a couple of times and pushed the intercom switch.
The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has this to say on the subject of flying.
There is an art, it says, or rather a knack to flying.
The knack lies in learning how to throw yourself at the ground and miss.
Pick a nice day, it suggests, and try it.
The first part is easy.
All it requires is simply the ability to throw yourself forward with all your weight, and the willingness not to mind that it's going to hurt.
That is, it's going to hurt if you fail to miss the ground.
Most people fail to miss the ground, and if they are really trying properly, the likelihood is that they will fail to miss it fairly hard.
Clearly, it's the second point, the missing, which presents the difficulties.
One problem is that you have to miss the ground accidentally.
It's no good deliberately intending to miss the ground because you won't.
You have to have your attention suddenly distracted by something else when you're halfway there, so that you are no longer thinking about falling, or about the ground, or about how much it's going to hurt if you fail to miss it.
It is notoriously difficult to prise your attention away from these three things during the split second you have at your disposal.
Hence most people's failure, and their eventual disillusionment with this exhilarating and spectacular sport.
This is a moment for superb and delicate concentration.
Bob and float, float and bob.
Ignore all considerations of your own weight and simply let yourself waft higher.
Do not listen to what anybody says to you at this point because they are unlikely to say anything helpful.
It is vitally important not to believe them or they will suddenly be right.
Waft higher and higher.
Try a few swoops, gentle ones at first, then drift above the treetops breathing regularly.
DO NOT WAVE AT ANYBODY.
When you have done this a few times you will find the moment of distraction rapidly becomes easier and easier to achieve.
You will then learn all sorts of things about how to control your flight, your speed, your manoeuvrability, and the trick usually lies in not thinking too hard about whatever you want to do, but just allowing it to happen as if it was going to anyway.
You will also learn how to land properly, which is something you will almost certainly cock up, and cock up badly, on your first attempt.
There are private flying clubs you can join which help you achieve the all-important moment of distraction.
They hire people with surprising bodies or opinions to leap out from behind bushes and exhibit and/or explain them at the crucial moments.
Few genuine hitch-hikers will be able to afford to join these clubs, but some may be able to get temporary employment at them.
The trek from the snow plains of Liska to the summit of the Ice Crystal Pyramids of Sastantua is long and gruelling, even with jet skis and a team of Syneca Snowhounds, but the view from the top, a view which takes in the Stin Glacier Fields, the shimmering Prism Mountains and the far ethereal dancing icelights, is one which first freezes the mind and then slowly releases it to hitherto unexperienced horizons of beauty, and Trillian, for one, felt that she could do with a bit of having her mind slowly released to hitherto unexperienced horizons of beauty.
They went into a low orbit.
There lay the silverwhite beauty of Allosimanius Syneca beneath them.
Zaphod stayed in bed with one head stuck under a pillow and the other doing crosswords till late into the night.
Trillian nodded patiently again, counted to a sufficiently high number, and told herself that the important thing now was just to get Zaphod talking.
She prepared, by dint of deactivating all the robot kitchen synthomatics, the most fabulously delicious meal she could contrive - delicately oiled meals, scented fruits, fragrant cheeses, fine Aldebaran wines.
She carried it through to him and asked if he felt like talking things through.
Trillian nodded patiently to herself, counted to an even higher number, tossed the tray lightly aside, walked to the transport room and just teleported herself the hell out of his life.
She didn't even programme any coordinates, she hadn't the faintest idea where she was going, she just went - a random row of dots flowing through the Universe.
The next day he restlessly paced the empty corridors of the ship, pretending not to look for her, though he knew she wasn't there.
He ignored the computer's querulous demands to know just what the hell was going on around here by fitting a small electronic gag across a pair of its terminals.
After a while he began to turn down the lights.
There was nothing to see.
Nothing was about to happen.
Lying in bed one night - and night was now virtually continuous on the ship - he decided to pull himself together, to get things into some kind of perspective.
He sat up sharply and started to pull clothes on.
He decided that there must be someone in the Universe feeling more wretched, miserable and forsaken than himself, and he determined to set out and find him.
Halfway to the bridge it occurred to him that it might be Marvin, and he returned to bed.
He leant tensely against the corridor wall and frowned like a man trying to unbend a corkscrew by telekinesis.
He laid his fingertips against the wall and felt an unusual vibration.
And now he could quite clearly hear slight noises, and could hear where they were coming from - they were coming from the bridge.
Zaphod buried one of his faces in two of his hands.
Then he stared up the corridor towards the entrance to the bridge in the dim distance from which more and purposeful noises were coming, and in which the gagged terminals were situated.
Now just tell me this.
One for yes, two for no.
He inched his way up the corridor as if he would rather be yarding his way down it, which was true.
He was within two yards of the door to the bridge when he suddenly realized to his horror that it was going to be nice to him, and he stopped dead.
This doorway to the bridge was concealed from view within it because of the excitingly chunky way in which the bridge had been designed to curve round, and he had been hoping to enter unobserved.
He leant despondently back against the wall again and said some words which his other head was quite shocked to hear.
He peered at the dim pink outline of the door, and discovered that in the darkness of the corridor he could just about make out the Sensor Field which extended out into the corridor and told the door when there was someone there for whom it must open and to whom it must make a cheery and pleasant remark.
He pressed himself hard back against the wall and edged himself towards the door, flattening his chest as much as he possibly could to avoid brushing against the very, very dim perimeter of the field.
He held his breath, and congratulated himself on having lain in bed sulking for the last few days rather than trying to work out his feelings on chest expanders in the ship's gym.
He then realized he was going to have to speak at this point.
Now, in a moment.
I'm going to ask you to open.
The door slid open quietly.
Zaphod slipped quietly through.
The door closed quietly behind him.
There was an immensely cold and savage silence.
The robots regarded him with hideously dead eyes.
They stood very still.
There was something intensely macabre about their appearance, especially to Zaphod who had never seen one before or even known anything about them.
He stared at them in shock.
It was impossible to explain why, but their smooth and sleek white bodies seemed to be the utter embodiment of clean, clinical evil.
From their hideously dead eyes to their powerful lifeless feet, they were clearly the calculated product of a mind that wanted simply to kill.
Zaphod gulped in cold fear.
They had been dismantling part of the rear bridge wall, and had forced a passage through some of the vital innards of the ship.
Through the tangled wreckage Zaphod could see, with a further and worse sense of shock, that they were tunnelling towards the very heart of the ship, the heart of the Improbability Drive that had been so mysteriously created out of thin air, the Heart of Gold itself.
The robot closest to him was regarding him in such a way as to suggest that it was measuring every smallest particle of his body, mind and capability.
And when it spoke, what it said seemed to bear this impression out.
Before going on to what it actually said, it is worth recording at this point that Zaphod was the first living organic being to hear one of these creatures speak for something over ten billion years.
If he had paid more attention to his ancient history lessons and less to his organic being, he might have been more impressed by this honour.
The robot's voice was like its body, cold, sleek and lifeless.
It had almost a cultured rasp to it.
It sounded as ancient as it was.
Zaphod didn't know what it meant for a moment, but then he glanced down at his own hand and was relieved to see that what he had found clipped to a wall bracket was indeed what he had thought it was.
For a while nobody said anything, and Zaphod realized that the robots were obviously not here to make conversation, and that it was up to him.
There was no denying this.
Without regard for any kind of proper dimensional behaviour they had simply materialized their ship precisely where they wanted it to be, which meant that it was simply locked through the Heart of Gold as if they were nothing more than two combs.
Again, they made no response to this, and Zaphod wondered if the conversation would gather any momentum if he phrased his part of it in the form of questions.
Silence.
Zaphod nodded.
He waggled his gun to invite further elaboration.
The robot seemed to understand this.
Zaphod nodded again.
He waggled his gun again.
The Golden Bail is embedded in the device which drives your ship.
It will be reconstituted in the Key.
Our Masters shall be released.
Zaphod nodded again.
A slightly pained expression seemed to cross the robot's totally expressionless face.
He seemed to be finding the conversation depressing.
Zaphod was so surprised that they had to shoot him again before he fell down.
Night had now fallen on ancient Krikkit.
The sky was dark and empty.
The only light was coming from the nearby town, from which pleasant convivial sounds were drifting quietly on the breeze.
They stood beneath a tree from which heady fragrances wafted arou nd them.
Arthur squatted and felt the Informational Illusion of the soil and the grass.
He ran it through his fingers.
The soil seemed heavy and rich, the grass strong.
It was hard to avoid the impression that this was a thoroughly delightful place in all respects.
The sky was, however, extremely blank and seemed to Arthur to cast a certain chill over the otherwise idyllic, if currently invisible, landscape.
Still, he supposed, it's a question of what you're used to.
He felt a tap on his shoulder and looked up.
Slartibartfast was quietly directing his attention to something down the other side of the hill.
He looked and could just see some faint lights dancing and waving, and moving slowly in their direction.
As they came nearer, sounds became audible too, and soon the dim lights and noises resolved themselves into a small group of people who were walking home across the hill towards the town.
They walked quite near the watchers beneath the tree, swinging lanterns which made soft and crazy lights dance among the trees and grass, chattering contentedly, and actually singing a song about how terribly nice everything was, how happy they were, how much they enjoyed working on the farm, and how pleasant it was to be going home to see their wives and children, with a lilting chorus to the effect that the flowers were smelling particularly nice at this time of year and that it was a pity the dog had died seeing as it liked them so much.
Arthur could almost imagine Paul McCartney sitting with his feet up by the fire on evening, humming it to Linda and wondering what to buy with the proceeds, and thinking probably Essex.
Coming, as it did, so hard upon the heels of his own thoughts about Essex this remark caused Arthur a moment's confusion.
Then the logic of the situation imposed itself on his scattered mind, and he discovered that he still didn't understand what the old man meant.
Arthur peered at the group and tried to make sense of what little information he had at his disposal at this point.
The people in the group were clearly alien, if only because they seemed a little tall, thin, angular and almost as pale as to be white, but otherwise they appeared remarkably pleasant; a little whimsical perhaps, one wouldn't necessarily want to spend a long coach journey with them, but the point was that if they deviated in any way from being good straightforward people it was in being perhaps too nice rather than not nice enough.
So why all this rasping lungwork from Slartibartfast which would seem more appropriate to a radio commercial for one of those nasty films about chainsaw operators taking their work home with them?
Then, this Krikkit angle was a tough one, too.
He hadn't quite fathomed the connection between what he knew as cricket, and what...
Slartibartfast interrupted his train of thought at this point as if sensing what was going through his mind.
Of all the races on the Galaxy, only the English could possibly revive the memory of the most horrific wars ever to sunder the Universe and transform it into what I'm afraid is generally regarded as an incomprehensibly dull and pointless game.
They slipped out from underneath the tree, and followed the cheery party along the dark hill path.
Their natural instinct was to tread quietly and stealthily in pursuit of their quarry, though, as they were simply walking through a recorded Informational Illusion, they could as easily have been wearing euphoniums and woad for all the notice their quarry would have taken of them.
Arthur noticed that a couple of members of the party were now singing a different song.
It came lilting back to them through the soft night air, and was a sweet romantic ballad which would have netted McCartney Kent and Essex and enabled him to put in a fair offer for Hampshire.
At this point Arthur noticed a curious feature to the song that the party were singing.
The middle eight bridge, which would have had McCartney firmly consolidated in Winchester and gazing intently over the Test Valley to the rich pickings of the New Forest beyond, had some curious lyrics.
Then he looked up again at the bewildering black sky, and had the distinct feeling that there was an important point here, if only he could grasp what it was.
It gave him a feeling of being alone in the Universe, and he said so.
They are surrounded by a huge Dust Cloud, you see, their single sun with its single world, and they are right out on the utmost eastern edge of the Galaxy.
Because of the Dust Cloud there has never been anything to see in the sky.
At night it is totally blank.
During the day there is the sun, but you can't look directly at that so they don't.
They are hardly aware of the sky.
It's as if they had a blind spot which extended 180 degrees from horizon to horizon.
He moved on, leaving the words ringing in the air behind him.
He moved on again.
As he spoke, they became aware of a very thin roaring scream high up in the sightless sky above them.
They glanced upwards in alarm, but for a moment or two could see nothing.
Then Arthur noticed that the people in the party in front of them had heard the noise, but that none of them seemed to know what to do with it.
They were glancing around themselves in consternation, left, right, forwards, backwards, even at the ground.
It never occurred to them to look upwards.
The profoundness of the shock and horror they emanated a few moments later when the burning wreckage of a spaceship came hurtling and screaming out of the sky and crashed about half a mile from where they were standing was something that you had to be there to experience.
Some speak of the Heart of Gold in hushed tones, some of the Starship Bistromath.
Many speak of the legendary and gigantic Starship Titanic, a majestic and luxurious cruise-liner launched from the great shipbuilding asteroid complexes of Artifactovol some hundreds of years ago now, and with good reason.
The designers and engineers decided, in their innocence, to build a prototype Improbability Field into it, which was meant, supposedly, to ensure that it was Infinitely Improbable that anything would ever go wrong with any part of the ship.
They did not realize that because of the quasi-reciprocal and circular nature of all Improbability calculations, anything that was Infinitely Improbable was actually very likely to happen almost immediately.
The Starship Titanic was a monstrously pretty sight as it lay beached like a silver Arcturan Megavoidwhale amongst the laser-lit tracery of its construction gantries, a brilliant cloud of pins and needles of light against the deep interstellar blackness; but when launched, it did not even manage to complete its very first radio message - an SOS - before undergoing a sudden and gratuitous total existence failure.
However, the same event which saw the disastrous failure of one science in its infancy also witnessed the apotheosis of another.
It was conclusively proven that more people watched the tri-d coverage of the launch than actually existed at the time, and this has now been recognized as the greatest achievement ever in the science of audience research.
Another spectacular media event of that time was the supernova which the star Ysllodins underwent a few hours later.
Ysllodins is the star around which most of the Galaxy's major insurance underwriters live, or rather lived.
But whilst these spaceships, and other great ones which come to mind, such as the Galactic Fleet Battleships - the GSS Daring, the GSS Audacy and the GSS Suicidal Insanity - are all spoken of with awe, pride, enthusiasm, affection, admiration, regret, jealousy, resentment, in fact most of the better known emotions, the one which regularly commands the most actual astonishment was Krikkit One, the first spaceship ever built by the people of Krikkit.
This is not because it was a wonderful ship.
It wasn't.
It was a crazy piece of near junk.
It looked as if it had been knocked up in somebody's backyard, and this was in fact precisely where it had been knocked up.
The period of time which had elapsed between the moment that the people of Krikkit had discovered that there was such a thing as space and the launching of their first spaceship was almost exactly a year.
Ford Prefect was extremely grateful, as he strapped himself in, that this was just another Informational Illusion, and that he was therefore completely safe.
In real life it wasn't a ship he would have set foot in for all the rice wine in China.
Slartibartfast assured him that it would, that they were perfectly safe and that it was all going to be extremely instructive and not a little harrowing.
Ford and Arthur decided just to relax and be harrowed.
In front of them and, of course, totally unaware of their presence for the very good reason that they weren't actually there, were the three pilots.
They had also constructed the ship.
They had been on the hill path that night singing wholesome heartwarming songs.
Their brains had been very slightly turned by the nearby crash of the alien spaceship.
They had spent weeks stripping every tiniest last secret out of the wreckage of that burnt-up spaceship, all the while singing lilting spaceship-stripping ditties.
They had then built their own ship and this was it.
This was their ship, and they were currently singing a little song about that too, expressing the twin joys of achievement and ownership.
The chorus was a little poignant, and told of their sorrow that their work had kept them such long hours in the garage, away from the company of their wives and children, who had missed them terribly but had kept them cheerful by bringing them continual stories of how nicely the puppy was growing up.
Pow, they took off.
They roared into the sky like a ship that knew precisely what it was doing.
I don't believe it.
He shook his head thoughtfully and gazed out of a tiny port at the nothingness outside it.
The trip passed uneventfully for a while, and Slartibartfast fastwound them through it.
Very quickly, therefore, they arrived at the inner perimeter of the hollow, spherical Dust Cloud which surrounded their sun and home planet, occupying, as it were, the next orbit out.
It was more as if there was a gradual change in the texture and consistency of space.
The darkness seemed now to thrum and ripple past them.
It was a very cold darkness, a very blank and heavy darkness, it was the darkness of the night sky of Krikkit.
The coldness and heaviness and blankness of it took a slow grip on Arthur's heart, and he felt acutely aware of the feelings of the Krikkit pilots which hung in the air like a thick static charge.
They were now on the very boundary of the historical knowledge of their race.
This was the very limit beyond which none of them had ever speculated, or even known that there was any speculation to be done.
The darkness of the cloud buffeted at the ship.
Inside was the silence of history.
Their historic mission was to find out if there was anything or anywhere on the other side of the sky, from which the wrecked spaceship could have come, another world maybe, strange and incomprehensible though this thought was to the enclosed minds of those who had lived beneath the sky of Krikkit.
History was gathering itself to deliver another blow.
Still the darkness thrummed at them, the blank enclosing darkness.
It seemed closer and closer, thicker and thicker, heavier and heavier.
And suddenly it was gone.
They flew out of the cloud.
They saw the staggering jewels of the night in their infinite dust and their minds sang with fear.
For a while they flew on, motionless against the starry sweep of the Galaxy, itself motionless against the infinite sweep of the Universe.
And then they turned round.
On the way back they sang a number of tuneful and reflective songs on the subjects of peace, justice, morality, culture, sport, family life and the obliteration of all other life forms.
Slartibartfast glanced at him gravely.
He demonstrated with his own piece.
Arthur did so, and felt the slight tingle of a mathematical function thrilling through the chicken leg as it moved four-dimensionally through what Slartibartfast had assured him was five-dimensional space.
The idea of a Universe didn't fit into their world picture, so to speak.
They simply couldn't cope with it.
And so, charmingly, delightfully, intelligently, whimsically if you like, they decided to destroy it.
Arthur did so.
He didn't like the topography of the waiter's smile, but he'd never liked graphs anyway.
Hell, I feel the same way some mornings.
Shit.
This was true.
The Krikkit attack on the Galaxy had been stunning.
Thousands and thousands of huge Krikkit warships had leapt suddenly out of hyperspace and simultaneously attacked thousands and thousands of major worlds, first seizing vital material supplies for building the next wave, and then calmly zapping those worlds out of existence.
The Galaxy, which had been enjoying a period of unusual peace and prosperity at the time, reeled like a man getting mugged in a meadow.
This too was true, and is the only explanation anyone has yet managed to come up with for the unimaginable speed with which the people of Krikkit had pursued their new and absolute purpose - the destruction of everything that wasn't Krikkit.
It is also the only explanation for their bewildering sudden grasp of all the hypertechnology involved in building their thousands of spaceships, and their millions of lethal white robots.
These had really struck terror into the hearts of everyone who had encountered them - in most cases, however, the terror was extremely short-lived, as was the person experiencing the terror.
They were savage, single-minded flying battle machines.
They wielded formidable multifunctional battleclubs which, brandished one way, would knock down buildings and, brandished another way, fired blistering Omni-Destructo Zap Rays and, brandished a third way, launched a hideous arsenal of grenades, ranging from minor incendiary devices to Maxi-Slorta Hypernuclear Devices which could take out a major sun.
Simply striking the grenades with the battleclubs simultaneously primed them, and launched them with phenomenal accuracy over distances ranging from mere yards to hundreds of thousands of miles.
He paused and chewed a little gum.
I mean a medium-sized galaxy against one little world, and how long did it take us?
The Clerk of the Court blinked at him.
He was clearly a bounder and a cad.
He seemed to think that the fact that he was the possessor of the finest legal mind ever discovered gave him the right to behave exactly as he liked, and unfortunately he appeared to be right.
The Clerk sat down.
A hydrospectic photo of him at this point would have revealed that he was steaming slightly.
Judiciary Pag gazed once more around the courtroom, wherein were assembled hundreds of the very highest officials of the entire Galactic administration, all in their ceremonial uniforms or bodies, depending on metabolism and custom.
Behind a wall of Zap-Proof Crystal stood a representative group of the people of Krikkit, looking with calm, polite loathing at all the aliens gathered to pass judgment on them.
This was the most momentous occasion in legal history, and Judiciary Pag knew it.
He took out his chewing gum and stuck it under his chair.
The grim silence in the courtroom seemed in accord with this view.
I mean it's just gonna be continual nervous time, isn't it, right?
Pow, pow, pow, when are they next coming at us?
Peaceful coexistence is just right out, right?
He sat back and sipped reflectively.
It's, like, these guys, you know, are entitled to their own view of the Universe.
And according to their view, which the Universe forced on them, right, they did right.
Sounds crazy, but I think you'll agree.
He consulted a piece of paper which he found in the back pocket of his Judicial jeans.
He shrugged.
He scratched his crotch reflectively.
He took another sip of water, then held it up to the light and frowned at it.
He twisted it round.
He pushed away the glass and leaned forward.
The solution was brilliant, and went like this: The planet of Krikkit was to be enclosed for perpetuity in an envelope of Slo-Time, inside which life would continue almost infinitely slowly.
All light would be deflected round the envelope so that it would remain invisible and impenetrable.
Escape from the envelope would be utterly impossible unless it were locked from the outside.
The Lock would be on an asteroid which would slowly orbit the envelope.
The key would be the symbol of the Galaxy - the Wikkit Gate.
By the time the applause in the court had died down, Judiciary Pag was already in the Sens-O-Shower with a rather nice member of the jury that he'd slipped a note to half an hour earlier.
Chapter 13 Two months later, Zipo Bibrok 5x108 had cut the bottoms off his Galactic State jeans, and was spending part of the enormous fee his judgments commanded lying on a jewelled beach having Essence of Qualactin rubbed into his back by the same rather nice member of the jury.
She was a Soolfinian girl from beyond the Cloudworlds of Yaga.
She had skin like lemon silk and was very interested in legal bodies.
None of this was on the tape of Informational Illusions, and is all based on hearsay.
He moved his body round slightly to catch the first rays of the third and greatest of primeval Vod's three suns which was now creeping over the ludicrously beautiful horizon, and the sky now glittered with some of the greatest tanning power ever known.
A fragrant breeze wandered up from the quiet sea, trailed along the beach, and drifted back to sea again, wondering where to go next.
On a mad impulse it went up to the beach again.
It drifted back to sea.
There was no need to say such a straightforward thing sumptuously, but she went ahead and did it anyway because it was that sort of day.
Zipo sat up sharply.
The Key and the warship were disintegrated and blasted into the space-time continuum.
She smiled, and ran a little more Essence of Qualactin on to her fingertips.
He relaxed and lay back down.
She tried again.
Again, you had to be there.
The fragrant breeze drifted up from the sea again.
A magician wandered along the beach, but no one needed him.
The old man paused and gathered his thoughts, for what he hoped would be one last onslaught on his story.
The robot waiter moved through the space-time matrices in a way which spectacularly combined the surly with the obsequious, made a snatch for the candle and got it.
They had had the bill, had argued convincingly about who had had the cannelloni and how many bottles of wine they had had, and, as Arthur had been dimly aware, had thereby successfully manoeuvred the ship out of subjective space and into a parking orbit round a strange planet.
The waiter was now anxious to complete his part of the charade and clear the bistro.
Listen.
The time streams are now very polluted.
There's a lot of muck floating about in them, flotsam and jetsam, and more and more of it is now being regurgitated into the physical world.
He realized that it had been a mistake, because the idea seemed to exercise a strange and unhealthy fascination on the mind of Ford Prefect.
The more that Slartibartfast unravelled the dark and tragic story of Krikkit and its people, the more Ford Prefect wanted to drink a lot and dance with girls.
The old man felt that he should not have mentioned the party until he absolutely had to.
But there it was, the fact was out, and Ford Prefect had attached himself to it the way an Arcturan Megaleach attaches itself to its victim before biting his head off and making off with his spaceship.
He gave one of his smiles which made people twitch.
Slartibartfast had hoped for an easy retirement.
He had been planning to learn to play the octraventral heebiephone - a pleasantly futile task, he knew, because he had the wrong number of mouths.
He had also been planning to write an eccentric and relentlessly inaccurate monograph on the subject of equatorial fjords in order to set the record wrong about one or two matters he saw as important.
Instead, he had somehow got talked into doing some part-time work for the Campaign for Real Time and had started to take it all seriously for the first time in his life.
As a result he now found himself spending his fast-declining years combating evil and trying to save the Galaxy.
He found it exhausting work and sighed heavily.
I noticed that five pieces of jetsam which had in relatively recent times plopped back into existence seemed to correspond to the five pieces of the missing Key.
Only two I could trace exactly - the Wooden Pillar, which appeared on your planet, and the Silver Bail.
It seems to be at some sort of party.
That's why I want to have as many drinks and dance with as many girls as possible while there are still any left.
Fie had been following the conversation doggedly up to this point, and was keen not to lose the thread now.
Fie paused to see if the matter was now cleared up.
The freshly puzzled looks clambering across Arthur's face told him that it wasn't.
It's a star which burns up other stars, got it?
Arthur accepted this, and Ford continued, picking up his early fierce momentum as best he could.
Slartibartfast frowned, partly in puzzlement and partly in umbrage.
Fie started to speak.
We can't win against obsession.
They care, we don't.
Everything, really.
Ford could feel the conversation slipping out of his control, and refused to be sidetracked by anything at this point.
Fie leant forward and rested his forehead on the tips of his fingers.
Fie stood up, shaking his head.
For some unexplained reason, the teleport cubicles were in the bathroom.
Chapter 15 Time travel is increasingly regarded as a menace.
History is being polluted.
The Encyclopedia Galactica has much to say on the theory and practice of time travel, most of which is incomprehensible to anyone who hasn't spent at least four lifetimes studying advanced hypermathematics, and since it was impossible to do this before time travel was invented, there is a certain amount of confusion as to how the idea was arrived at in the first place.
One rationalization of this problem states that time travel was, by its very nature, discovered simultaneously at all periods of history, but this is clearly bunk.
The trouble is that a lot of history is now quite clearly bunk as well.
Here is an example.
It may not seem to be an important one to some people, but to others it is crucial.
There is, or was, a poet.
His name was Lallafa, and he wrote what are widely regarded throughout the Galaxy as being the finest poems in existence, the Songs of the Long Land.
They are/were unspeakably wonderful.
That is to say, you couldn't speak very much of them at once without being so overcome with emotion, truth and a sense of wholeness and oneness of things that you wouldn't pretty soon need a brisk walk round the block, possibly pausing at a bar on the way back for a quick glass of perspective and soda.
They were that good.
Lallafa had lived in the forests of the Long Lands of Effa.
He lived there, and he wrote his poems there.
He wrote them on pages made of dried habra leaves, without the benefit of education or correcting fluid.
He wrote about the light in the forest and what he thought about that.
He wrote about the darkness in the forest, and what he thought about that.
He wrote about the girl who had left him and precisely what he thought about that.
Long after his death his poems were found and wondered over.
News of them spread like morning sunlight.
For centuries they illuminated and watered the lives of many people whose lives might otherwise have been darker and drier.
Then, shortly after the invention of time travel, some major correcting fluid manufacturers wondered whether his poems might have been better still if he had had access to some high-quality correcting fluid, and whether he might be persuaded to say a few words on that effect.
They travelled the time waves, they found him, they explained the situation - with some difficulty - to him, and did indeed persuade him.
In fact they persuaded him to such an effect that he became extremely rich at their hands, and the girl about whom he was otherwise destined to write which such precision never got around to leaving him, and in fact they moved out of the forest to a rather nice pad in town and he frequently commuted to the future to do chat shows, on which he sparkled wittily.
He never got around to writing the poems, of course, which was a problem, but an easily solved one.
The manufacturers of correcting fluid simply packed him off for a week somewhere with a copy of a later edition of his book and a stack of dried habra leaves to copy them out on to, making the odd deliberate mistake and correction on the way.
Many people now say that the poems are suddenly worthless.
Others argue that they are exactly the same as they always were, so what's changed?
The first people say that that isn't the point.
They aren't quite sure what the point is, but they are quite sure that that isn't it.
They set up the Campaign for Real Time to try to stop this sort of thing going on.
Their case was considerably strengthened by the fact that a week after they had set themselves up, news broke that not only had the great Cathedral of Chalesm been pulled down in order to build a new ion refinery, but that the construction of the refinery had taken so long, and had had to extend so far back into the past in order to allow ion production to start on time, that the Cathedral of Chalesm had now never been built in the first place.
Picture postcards of the cathedral suddenly became immensely valuable.
So a lot of history is now gone for ever.
The Campaign for Real Timers claim that just as easy travel eroded the differences between one country and another, and between one world and another, so time travel is now eroding the differences between one age and another.
Chapter 16 Arthur materialized, and did so with all the customary staggering about and clasping at his throat, heart and various limbs which he still indulged himself in whenever he made any of these hateful and painful materializations that he was determined not to let himself get used to.
He looked around for the others.
They weren't there.
He looked around for the others again.
They still weren't there.
He closed his eyes.
He opened them He looked around for the others.
They obstinately persisted in their absence.
He closed his eyes again, preparatory to making this completely futile exercise once more, and because it was only then, whilst his eyes were closed, that his brain began to register what his eyes had been looking at whilst they were open, a puzzled frown crept across his face.
So he opened his eyes again to check his facts and the frown stayed put.
If anything, it intensified, and got a good firm grip.
If this was a party it was a very bad one, so bad, in fact, that everybody else had left.
He abandoned this line of thought as futile.
Obviously this wasn't a party.
It was a cave, or a labyrinth, or a tunnel of something - there was insufficient light to tell.
All was darkness, a damp shiny darkness.
The only sounds were the echoes of his own breathing, which sounded worried.
He coughed very slightly, and then had to listen to the thin ghostly echo of his cough trailing away amongst winding corridors and sightless chambers, as of some great labyrinth, and eventually returning to him via the same unseen corridors, as if to say...
This happened to every slightest noise he made, and it unnerved him.
He tried to hum a cheery tune, but by the time it returned to him it was a hollow dirge and he stopped.
His mind was suddenly full of images from the story that Slartibartfast had been telling him.
He half-expected suddenly to see lethal white robots step silently from the shadows and kill him.
He caught his breath.
They didn't.
He let it go again.
He didn't know what he did expect.
Someone or something, however, seemed to be expecting him, for at that moment there lit up suddenly in the dark distance an eerie green neon sign.
It said, silently: YOU HAVE BEEN DIVERTED The sign flicked off again, in a way which Arthur was not at all certain he liked.
It flicked off with a sort of contemptuous flourish.
Arthur then tried to assure himself that this was just a ridiculous trick of his imagination.
A neon sign is either on or off, depending on whether it has electricity running through it or not.
There was no way, he told himself, that it could possibly effect the transition from one state to the other with a contemptuous flourish.
He hugged himself tightly in his dressing gown and shivered, nevertheless.
The neon sign in the depths now suddenly lit up, bafflingly, with just three dots and a comma.
Like this:   v Only in green neon.
It was trying, Arthur realized after staring at this perplexedly for a second or two, to indicate that there was more to come, that the sentence was not complete.
Trying with almost superhuman pedantry, he reflected.
Or at least, inhuman pedantry.
The sentence then completed itself with these two words: ARTHUR DENT.
He reeled.
He steadied himself to have another clear look at it.
It still said ARTHUR DENT, so he reeled again.
Once again, the sign flicked off, and left him blinking in the darkness with just the dim red image of his name jumping on his retina.
WELCOME, the sign now suddenly said.
After a moment, it added: I DON'T THINK.
The stone-cold fear which had been hovering about Arthur all this time, waiting for its moment, recognized that its moment had now come and pounced on him.
He tried to fight it off.
He dropped into a kind of alert crouch that he had once seen somebody do on television, but it must have been someone with stronger knees.
He peered huntedly into the darkness.
He listened to it for a few seconds and realized that it was just his heart beating.
He listened for a few seconds more and realized that it wasn't his heart beating, it was somebody down the corridor beating on a bass drum.
Beads of sweat formed on his brow, tensed themselves, and leapt off.
He put a hand out on the floor to steady his alert crouch, which wasn't holding up very well.
The sign changed itself again.
It said: DO NOT BEALARMED.
After a pause, it added: BE VERY VERY FRIGHTENED, ARTHUR DENT.
Once again it flicked off.
Once again it left him in darkness.
His eyes seemed to be popping out of his head.
He wasn't certain if this was because they were trying to see more clearly, or if they simply wanted to leave at this point.
There was no reply, nothing.
This unnerved Arthur Dent even more than a reply would have done, and he began to back away from the scary nothingness.
And the more he backed away, the more scared he became.
After a while he realized that the reason for this was because of all the films he had seen in which the hero backs further and further away from some imagined terror in front of him, only to bump into it coming up from behind.
Just then it suddenly occurred to him to turn round rather quickly.
There was nothing there.
Just blackness.
This really unnerved him, and he started to back away from that, back the way he had come.
After doing this for a short while it suddenly occurred to him that he was now backing towards whatever it was he had been backing away from in the first place.
This, he couldn't help thinking, must be a foolish thing to do.
He decided he would be better off backing the way he had first been backing, and turned around again.
It turned out at this point that his second impulse had been the correct one, because there was an indescribably hideous monster standing quietly behind him.
Arthur yawed wildly as his skin tried to jump one way and his skeleton the other, whilst his brain tried to work out which of his ears it most wanted to crawl out of.
He could tell that he hadn't met the creature before from the simple fact that he was able to sleep at nights.
It was... it was... it was...
Arthur blinked at it.
It stood very still.
It did look a little familiar.
A terrible cold calm came over him as he realized that what he was looking at was a six-foot-high hologram of a housefly.
He wondered why anybody would be showing him a six-foot-high hologram of a housefly at this time.
He wondered whose voice he had heard.
It was a terribly realistic hologram.
It vanished.
With a sudden ping, there was a rabbit there in the black labyrinth with him, a huge, monstrously, hideously soft and lovable rabbit - an image again, but one on which every single soft and lovable hair seemed like a real and single thing growing in its soft and lovable coat.
Arthur was startled to see his own reflection in its soft and lovable unblinking and extremely huge brown eyes.
One morning I poked my head for the first time into the bright new world and got it split open by what felt suspiciously like some primitive instrument made of flint.
Rather hard as I recall.
I happen to know that because in my next life I came back as a fly again and you swatted me.
Again.
Only this time you swatted me with the bag you'd made of my previous skin.
The voice paused whilst Arthur gawped.
Arthur shook his head helplessly.
He wanted to explain that he had been in fact very fond of the bag and had looked after it very well and had taken it with him wherever he went, but that somehow every time he travelled anywhere he seemed inexplicably to end up with the wrong bag and that, curiously enough, even as they stood there he was just noticing for the first time that the bag he had with him at the moment appeared to be made out of rather nasty fake leopard skin, and wasn't the one he'd had a few moments ago before he arrived in this whatever place it was, and wasn't one he would have chosen himself and heaven knew what would be in it as it wasn't his, and he would much rather have his original bag back, except that he was of course terribly sorry for having so peremptorily removed it, or rather its component parts, i.e. the rabbit skin, from its previous owner, viz. the rabbit whom he currently had the honour of attempting vainly to address.
And there was, standing in the corridor with Arthur, a giant green scaly newt.
Arthur turned, yelped, leapt backwards, and found himself standing in the middle of the rabbit.
He yelped again, but could find nowhere to leap to.
He paused for effect.
As far as Arthur was concerned there was already quite enough effect going on.
Slowly.
He, whoever he was, paused again and gathered breath.
Every life I ever lived, I got killed by Arthur Dent.
Any world, any body, any time, I'm just getting settled down, along comes Arthur Dent - pow, he kills me.
Bit of a memory jogger.
Bit of a pointer.
Bit of a bloody giveaway!
And gradually I got to piece it together.
The echoes of his voice roared up and down the corridors.
Arthur stood silent and cold, his head shaking with disbelief.
It was indescribably hideous, the thing that suddenly opened up in front of Arthur, making him gasp and gargle with horror, but here's an attempt at a description of how hideous it was.
It was a huge palpitating wet cave with a vast, slimy, rough, whale-like creature rolling around it and sliding over monstrous white tombstones.
High above the cave rose a vast promontory in which could be seen the dark recesses of two further fearful caves, which...
Arthur Dent suddenly realized that he was looking at his own mouth, when his attention was meant to be directed at the live oyster that was being tipped helplessly into it.
He staggered back with a cry and averted his eyes.
When he looked again the appalling apparition had gone.
The corridor was dark and, briefly, silent.
He was alone with his thoughts.
They were extremely unpleasant thoughts and would rather have had a chaperone.
The next noise, when it came, was the low heavy roll of a large section of wall trundling aside, revealing, for the moment, just dark blackness behind it.
Arthur looked into it in much the same way that a mouse looks into a dark dog-kennel.
And the voice spoke to him again.
Arthur walked in and said that it was a coincidence, or at least, he nearly said that it was a coincidence.
His tongue rather lost its footing towards the end of the last word because the lights came up and revealed what it was he had walked into.
It was a Cathedral of Hate.
It was the product of a mind that was not merely twisted, but actually sprained.
It was huge.
It was horrific.
It had a Statue in it.
We will come to the Statue in a moment.
The vast, incomprehensibly vast chamber looked as if it had been carved out of the inside of a mountain, and the reason for this was that that was precisely what it had been carved out of.
It seemed to Arthur to spin sickeningly round his head as he stood and gaped at it.
It was black.
Where it wasn't black you were inclined to wish that it was, because the colours with which some of the unspeakable details were picked out ranged horribly across the whole spectrum of eye-defying colours from Ultra Violent to Infra Dead, taking in Liver Purple, Loathsome Lilac, Matter Yellow, Burnt hombre and Gan Green on the way.
The unspeakable details which these colours picked out were gargoyles which would have put Francis Bacon off his lunch.
The gargoyles all looked inwards from the walls, from the pillars, from the flying buttresses, from the choir stalls, towards the Statue, to which we will come in a moment.
Around the monumental walls were vast engraved stone tablets in memory of those who had fallen to Arthur Dent.
The names of some of those commemorated were underlined and had asterisks against them.
So, for instance, the name of a cow which had been slaughtered and of which Arthur Dent had happened to eat a fillet steak would have the plainest engraving, whereas the name of a fish which Arthur had himself caught and then decided he didn't like and left on the side of the plate had a double underlining, three sets of asterisks and a bleeding dagger added as decoration, just to make the point.
And what was most disturbing about all this, apart from the Statue, to which we are, by degrees, coming, was the very clear implication that all these people and creatures were indeed the same person, over and over again.
And it was equally clear that this person was, however u nfairly, extremely upset and annoyed.
In fact it would be fair to say that he had reached a level of annoyance the like of which had never been seen in the Universe.
It was an annoyance of epic proportions, a burning searing flame of annoyance, an annoyance which now spanned the whole of time and space in its infinite umbrage.
And this annoyance had been given its fullest expression in the Statue in the centre of all this monstrosity, which was a statue of Arthur Dent, and an unflattering one.
Fifty feet tall if it was an inch, there was not an inch of it which wasn't crammed with insult to its subject matter, and fifty feet of that sort of thing would be enough to make any subject feel bad.
From the small pimple on the side of his nose to the poorish cut of his dressing gown, there was no aspect of Arthur Dent which wasn't lambasted and vilified by the sculptor.
Arthur appeared as a gorgon, an evil, rapacious, ravenning, bloodied ogre, slaughtering his way through an innocent one-man Universe.
With each of the thirty arms which the sculptor in a fit of artistic fervour had decided to give him, he was either braining a rabbit, swatting a fly, pulling a wishbone, picking a flea out of his hair, or doing something which Arthur at first looking couldn't quite identify.
His many feet were mostly stamping on ants.
Arthur put his hands over his eyes, hung his head and shook it slowly from side to side in sadness and horror at the craziness of things.
And when he opened his eyes again, there in front of him stood the figure of the man or creature, or whatever it was, that he had supposedly been persecuting all this time.
Fie, or it, or whatever, looked like a mad fat bat.
Fie waddled slowly around Arthur, and poked at him with bent claws.
Agrajag was black, bloated, wrinkled and leathery.
His batwings were somehow more frightening for being the pathetic broken floundering things they were that if they had been strong, muscular beaters of the air.
The frightening thing was probably the tenacity of his continued existence against all the physical odds.
He had the most astounding collection of teeth.
They looked as if they each came from a completely different animal, and they were ranged around his mouth at such bizarre angles it seemed that if he ever actually tried to chew anything he'd lacerate half his own face along with it, and possibly put an eye out as well.
Each of his three eyes was small and intense and looked about as sane as a fish in a privet bush.
This seemed on the face of it such a preposterous notion that Arthur practically choked.
This is my last body.
My last life.
This is my revenge body.
My kill-Arthur- Dent body.
My last chance.
I had a weak heart condition, but what, I said to my wife, can happen to me at a cricket match?
As I'm watching, what happens?
The last thing I can't help but notice before my poor heart gives out in shock is that one of them is Arthur Dent wearing a rabbit bone in his beard.
On closer examination, such as he'd been hoping to avoid, Arthur noticed that much of Agrajag's face was covered with ragged strips of black sticky plasters.
He backed away nervously.
He tugged at his beard.
He was appalled to discover that in fact he still had the rabbit bone in it.
He pulled it out and threw it away.
With me.
With us.
Agrajag fixed him with a beady stare.
Very curious piece of social interaction, I would call that.
There's been a terrible misunderstanding.
I've got to go.
Have you got a clock?
He backed away still further.
Agrajag advanced still further.
Yes, I would not come back.
I would stay in the netherworld.
Arthur indicated with random shakes of his head that he had no idea and didn't want to have one either.
He found he had backed up against the cold dark stone that had been carved by who knew what Herculean effort into a monstrous travesty of his bedroom slippers.
He glanced up at his own horrendously parodied image towering above him.
He was still puzzled as to what one of his hands was meant to be doing.
In, I might add, a bowl.
This particularly happy little lifetime started off with me, in my bowl, unsupported, three hundred miles above the surface of a particularly grim planet.
Not a naturally tenable position for a bowl of petunias, you might think.
And you'd be right.
That life ended a very short while later, three hundred miles lower.
In, I might add, the fresh wreckage of a whale.
He leered at Arthur with renewed hatred.
And looking out of a port on this flashy- looking spaceship was a smug-looking Arthur Dent.
He glanced up again, and realized that the arm that had puzzled him was represented as wantonly calling into existence a bowl of doomed petunias.
This was not a concept which leapt easily to the eye.
I have to find a Silver Bail, that's the point.
Who do you think the bullet hit?
Agrajag stopped in his tracks.
You were responsible for my death there, as everywhere else.
He quivered.
Other than you.
Agrajag blinked slowly in a kind of frozen logical horror.
He started to scream and bellow.
Suddenly he rallied, and turned a baleful, hating eye on Arthur.
He rushed in a painful waddling hobble to what appeared to be a small black sacrificial altar.
He was shouting so wildly now that he was really carving his face up badly.
Arthur leaped down from his vantage place on the carving of his own foot and ran to try to restrain the three-quarters-crazed creature.
He leaped upon him, and brought the strange monstrosity crashing down on top of the altar.
Agrajag screamed again, thrashed wildly for a brief moment, and turned a wild eye on Arthur.
He thrashed again in a brief apoplectic fit, quivered, and collapsed, smacking a large red button on the altar as he did so.
Arthur started with horror and fear, first at what he appeared to have done, and then at the loud sirens and bells that suddenly shattered the air to announce some clamouring emergency.
He stared wildly around him.
The only exit appeared to be the way he came in.
He pelted towards it, throwing away the nasty fake leopard-skin bag as he did so.
He dashed randomly, haphazardly through the labyrinthine maze, he seemed to be pursued more and more fiercely by claxons, sirens, flashing lights.
Suddenly, he turned a corner and there was a light in front of him.
It wasn't flashing.
It was daylight.
In some of the higher dimensions they feel they can more or less please themselves, and have been playing a peculiar game called Brockian Ultra-Cricket for whatever their transdimensional equivalent of billions of years is.
This is another example of the fact that The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy will employ anybody who wants to walk straight in off the street and get ripped off, especially if they happen to walk in off the street during the afternoon, when very few of the regular staff are there.
There is a fundamental point here.
The history of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is one of idealism, struggle, despair, passion, success, failure, and enormously long lunch-breaks.
The earliest origins of the Guide are now, along with most of its financial records, lost in the mists of time.
For other, and more curious theories about where they are lost, see below.
Most of the surviving stories, however, speak of a founding editor called Hurling Frootmig.
Hurling Frootmig, it is said, founded the Guide, established its fundamental principles of honesty and idealism, and went bust.
He also started to develop and explore the role of the editorial lunch-break which was subsequently to play such a crucial part in the Guide's history, since it meant that most of the actual work got done by any passing stranger who happened to wander into the empty offices on an afternoon and saw something worth doing.
Shortly after this, the Guide was taken over by Megadodo Publications of Ursa Minor Beta, thus putting the whole thing on a very sound financial footing, and allowing the fourth editor, Lig Lury Jr, to embark on lunch-breaks of such breathtaking scope that even the efforts of recent editors, who have started undertaking sponsored lunch-breaks for charity, seem like mere sandwiches in comparison.
In fact, Lig never formally resigned his editorship - he merely left his office late one morning and has never since returned.
Though well over a century has now passed, many members of the Guide staff still retain the romantic notion that he has simply popped out for a ham croissant, and will yet return to put in a solid afternoon's work.
Very little is known of this, and less still said.
Anyone who even notices, let alone calls attention to, the curious but utter coincidental and meaningless fact that every world on which the Guide has ever set up an accounting department has shortly afterwards perished in warfare or some natural disaster, is liable to get sued to smithereens.
It is an interesting though utterly unrelated fact that the two or three days prior to the demolition of the planet Earth to make way for a new hyperspace bypass saw a dramatic upsurge in the number of UFO sightings there, not only above Lords Cricket Ground in St. John's Wood, London, but also above Glastonbury in Somerset.
None of these facts, however strange or inexplicable, is as strange or inexplicable as the rules of the game of Brockian Ultra-Cricket, as played in the higher dimensions.
A full set of rules is so massively complicated that the only time they were all bound together in a single volume, they underwent gravitational collapse and became a Black Hole.
A brief summary, however, is as follows: Rule One: Grow at least three extra legs.
You won't need them, but it keeps the crowds amused.
Rule Two: Find one good Brockian Ultra-Cricket player.
Clone him off a few times.
This saves an enormous amount of tedious selection and training.
Rule Three: Put your team and the opposing team in a large field and build a high wall round them.
The reason for this is that, though the game is a major spectator sport, the frustration experienced by the audience at not actually being able to see what's going on leads them to imagine that it's a lot more exciting than it really is.
A crowd that has just watched a rather humdrum game experiences far less life-affirmation than a crowd that believes it has just missed the most dramatic event in sporting history.
Rule Four: Throw lots of assorted items of sporting equipment over the wall for the players.
Anything will do - cricket bats, basecube bats, tennis guns, skis, anything you can get a good swing with.
Rule Five: The players should now lay about themselves for all they are worth with whatever they find to hand.
Apologies should be concise, sincere and, for maximum clarity and points, delivered through a megaphone.
Rule Six: The winning team shall be the first team that wins.
Curiously enough, the more the obsession with the game grows in the higher dimensions, the less it is actually played, since most of the competing teams are now in a state of permanent warfare with each other over the interpretation of these rules.
This is all for the best, because in the long run a good solid war is less psychologically damaging than a protracted game of Brockian Ultra-Cricket.
Chapter 18 As Arthur ran darting, dashing and panting down the side of the mountain he suddenly felt the whole bulk of the mountain move very, very slightly beneath him.
There was a rumble, a roar, and a slight blurred movement, and a lick of heat in the distance behind and above him.
He ran in a frenzy of fear.
It had always just been a word to him, but now he was suddenly and horribly aware that sliding is a strange and sickening thing for land to do.
It was doing it with him on it.
He felt ill with fear and shaking.
The ground slid, the mountain slurred, he slipped, he fell, he stood, he slipped again and ran.
The avalance began.
Stones, then rocks, then boulders which pranced past him like clumsy puppies, only much, much bigger, much, much harder and heavier, and almost infinitely more likely to kill you if they fell on you.
His eyes danced with them, his feet danced with the dancing ground.
He ran as if running was a terrible sweating sickness, his heart pounded to the rhythm of the pounding geological frenzy around him.
The logic of the situation, i.e. that he was clearly bound to survive if the next foreshadowed incident in the saga of his inadvertent persecution of Agrajag was to happen, was utterly failing to impinge itself on his mind or exercise any restraining influence on him at this time.
He ran with the fear of death in him, under him, over him and grabbing hold of his hair.
And suddenly he tripped again and was hurled forward by his considerable momentum.
But just at the moment that he was about to hit the ground astoundingly hard he saw lying directly in front of him a small navy-blue holdall that he knew for a fact he had lost in the baggage-retrieval system at Athens airport some ten years in his personal time-scale previously, and in his astonishment he missed the ground completely and bobbed off into the air with his brain singing.
What he was doing was this: he was flying.
He glanced around him in surprise, but there could be no doubt that that was what he was doing.
No part of him was touching the ground, and no part of him was even approaching it.
He was simply floating there with boulders hurtling through the air around him.
He could now do something about that.
Blinking with the non effort of it he wafted higher into the air, and now the boulders were hurtling through the air beneath him.
He looked downwards with intense curiosity.
Between him and the shivering ground were now some thirty feet of empty air, empty that is if you discounted the boulders which didn't stay in it for long, but bounded downwards in the iron grip of the law of gravity; the same law which seemed, all of a sudden, to have given Arthur a sabbatical.
It occurred to him almost instantly, with the instinctive correctness that self-preservation instils in the mind, that he mustn't try to think about it, that if he did, the law of gravity would suddenly glance sharply in his direction and demand to know what the hell he thought he was doing up there, and all would suddenly be lost.
So he thought about tulips.
It was difficult, but he did.
He thought about the pleasing firm roundness of the bottom of tulips, he thought about the interesting variety of colours they came in, and wondered what proportion of the total number of tulips that grew, or had grown, on the Earth would be found within a radius of one mile from a windmill.
After a while he got dangerously bored with this train of thought, felt the air slipping away beneath him, felt that he was drifting down into the paths of the bouncing boulders that he was trying so hard not to think about, so he thought about Athens airport for a bit and that kept him usefully annoyed for about five minutes - at the end of which he was startled to discover that he was now floating about two hundred yards above the ground.
He wondered for a moment how he was going to get back down to it, but instantly shied away from that area of speculation again, and tried to look at the situation steadily.
He was flying, What was he going to do about it?
He looked back down at the ground.
He didn't look at it hard, but did his best just to give it an idle glance, as it were, in passing.
There were a couple of things he couldn't help noticing.
One was that the eruption of the mountain seemed now to have spent itself - there was a crater just a little way beneath the peak, presumably where the rock had caved in on top of the huge cavernous cathedral, the statue of himself, and the sadly abused figure of Agrajag.
The other was his hold-all, the one he had lost at Athens airport.
It was sitting pertly on a piece of clear ground, surrounded by exhausted boulders but apparently hit by none of them.
Why this should be he could not speculate, but since this mystery was completely overshadowed by the monstrous impossibility of the bag's being there in the first place, it was not a speculation he really felt strong enough for anyway.
The thing is, it was there.
And the nasty, fake leopard-skin bag seemed to have disappeared, which was all to the good, if not entirely to the explicable.
He was faced with the fact that he was going to have to pick the thing up.
Here he was, flying along two hundred yards above the surface of an alien planet the name of which he couldn't even remember.
He could not ignore the plaintive posture of this tiny piece of what used to be his life, here, so many light-years from the pulverized remains of his home.
Furthermore, he realized, the bag, if it was still in the state in which he lost it, would contain a can which would have in it the only Greek olive oil still surviving in the Universe.
Slowly, carefully, inch by inch, he began to bob downwards, swinging gently from side to side like a nervous sheet of paper feeling its way towards the ground.
It went well, he was feeling good.
The air supported him, but let him through.
Two minutes later he was hovering a mere two feet above the bag, and was faced with some difficult decision.
He bobbed there lightly.
He frowned, but again, as lightly as he could.
If he picked the bag up, could he carry it?
Mightn't the extra weight just pull him straight to the ground?
Mightn't the mere act of touching something on the ground suddenly discharge whatever mysterious force it was that was holding him in the air?
Mightn't he be better off just being sensible at this point and stepping out of the air, back on to the ground for a moment or two?
If he did, would he ever be able to fly again?
The sensation, when he allowed himself to be aware of it, was so quietly ecstatic that he could not bear the thought of losing it, perhaps for ever.
With this worry in mind he bobbed upwards a little again, just to try the feel of it, the surprising and effortless movement of it.
He bobbed, he floated.
He tried a little swoop.
The swoop was terrific.
With his arms spread out in front of him, his hair and dressing gown streaming out behind him, he dived down out of the sky, bellied along a body of air about two feet from the ground and swung back up again, catching himself at the top of the swing and holding.
Just holding.
He stayed there.
It was wonderful.
And that, he realized, was the way of picking up the bag.
He would swoop down and catch hold of it just at the point of the upswing.
He would carry it on up with him.
He might wobble a bit, but he was certain that he could hold it.
He tried one or two more practice swoops, and they got better and better.
The air on his face, the bounce and woof of his body, all combined to make him feel an intoxication of the spirit that he hadn't felt since, since - well as far as he could work out, since he was born.
He drifted away on the breeze and surveyed the countryside, which was, he discovered, pretty nasty.
It had a wasted ravaged look.
He decided not to look at it any more.
He would just pick up the bag and then... he didn't know what he was going to do after he had picked up the bag.
He decided he would just pick up the bag and see where things went from there.
He judged himself against the wind, pushed up against it and turned around.
He floated on its body.
He didn't realize, but his body was willoming at this point.
He ducked down under the airstream, dipped - and dived.
The air threw itself past him, he thrilled through it.
The ground wobbled uncertainly, straightened its ideas out and rose smoothly up to meet him, offering the bag, its cracked plastic handles up towards him.
Halfway down there was a sudden dangerous moment when he could no longer believe he was doing this, and therefore he very nearly wasn't, but he recovered himself in time, skimmed over the ground, slipped an arm smoothly through the handles of the bag, and began to climb back up, couldn't make it and all of a sudden collapsed, bruised, scratched and shaking in the stony ground.
He staggered instantly to his feet and swayed hopelessly around, swinging the bag round him in agony of grief and disappointment.
His feet, suddenly, were stuck heavily to the ground in the way they always had been.
His body seemed like an unwieldy sack of potatoes that reeled stumbling against the ground, his mind had all the lightness of a bag of lead.
He sagged and swayed and ached with giddiness.
He tried hopelessly to run, but his legs were suddenly too weak.
He tripped and flopped forward.
At that moment he remembered that in the bag he was now carrying was not only a can of Greek olive oil but a duty free allowance of retsina, and in the pleasurable shock of that realization he failed to notice for at least ten seconds that he was now flying again.
He whooped and cried with relief and pleasure, and sheer physical delight.
He swooped, he wheeled, he skidded and whirled through the air.
Cheekily he sat on an updraught and went through the contents of the hold-all.
He felt the way he imagined an angel must feel during its celebrated dance on the head of a pin whilst being counted by philosophers.
He laughed with pleasure at the discovery that the bag did in fact contain the olive oil and the retsina as well as a pair of cracked sunglasses, some sand-filled swimming trunks, some creased postcards of Santorini, a large and unsightly towel, some interesting stones, and various scraps of paper with the addresses of people he was relieved to think he would never meet again, even if the reason why was a sad one.
He dropped the stones, put on the sunglasses, and let the pieces of paper whip away in the wind.
Ten minutes later, drifting idly through a cloud, he got a large and extremely disreputable cocktail party in the small of the back.
Chapter 19 The longest and most destructive party ever held is now into its fourth generation, and still no one shows any signs of leaving.
Somebody did once look at his watch, but that was eleven years ago, and there has been no follow-up.
The mess is extraordinary, and has to be seen to be believed, but if you don't have any particular need to believe it, then don't go and look, because you won't enjoy it.
There have recently been some bangs and flashes up in the clouds, and there is one theory that this is a battle being fought between the fleets of several rival carpet-cleaning companies who are hovering over the thing like vultures, but you shouldn't believe anything you hear at parties, and particularly not anything you hear at this one.
One of the problems, and it's one which is obviously going to get worse, is that all the people at the party are either the children or the grandchildren or the great-grandchildren of the people who wouldn't leave in the first place, and because of all the business about selective breeding and regressive genes and so on, it means that all the people now at the party are either absolutely fanatical partygoers, or gibbering idiots, or, more and more frequently, both.
Either way, it means that, genetically speaking, each succeeding generation is now less likely to leave than the preceding one.
So other factors come into operation, like when the drink is going to run out.
One of the things which seemed like a good idea at the time was that the party should fly - not in the normal sense that parties are meant to fly, but literally.
One night, long ago, a band of drunken astro-engineers of the first generation clambered round the building digging this, fixing that, banging very hard on the other and when the sun rose the following morning, it was startled to find itself shining on a building full of happy drunken people which was now floating like a young and uncertain bird over the treetops.
Not only that, but the flying party had also managed to arm itself rather heavily.
If they were going to get involved in any petty arguments with wine merchants, they wanted to make sure they had might on their side.
The transition from full-time cocktail party to part-time raiding party came with ease, and did much to add that extra bit of zest and swing to the whole affair which was badly needed at this point because of the enormous number of times that the band had already played all the numbers it knew over the years.
They looted, they raided, they held whole cities for ransom for fresh supplies of cheese crackers, avocado dip, spare ribs and wine and spirits, which would now get piped aboard from floating tankers.
The problem of when the drink is going to run out is, however, going to have to be faced one day.
The planet over which they are floating is no longer the planet it was when they first started floating over it.
It is in bad shape.
The party had attacked and raided an awful lot of it, and no one has ever succeeded in hitting it back because of the erratic and unpredictable way in which it lurches round the sky.
It is one hell of a party.
It is also one hell of a thing to get hit by in the small of the back.
Chapter 20 Arthur lay floundering in pain on a piece of ripped and dismembered reinforced concrete, flicked at by wisps of passing cloud and confused by the sounds of flabby merrymaking somewhere indistinctly behind him.
He lay, panting heavily in the wet air, and tried feeling bits of himself to see where he might be hurt.
Wherever he touched himself, he encountered a pain.
After a short while he worked out that this was because it was his hand that was hurting.
He seemed to have sprained his wrist.
His back, too, was hurting, but he soon satisfied himself that he was not badly hurt, but just bruised and a little shaken, as who wouldn't be?
He couldn't understand what a building would be doing flying through the clouds.
On the other hand, he would have been a little hard-pressed to come up with any convincing explanation of his own presence, so he decided that he and the building were just going to have to accept each other.
He looked up from where he was lying.
A wall of pale but stained stone slabs rose up behind him, the building proper.
He seemed to be stretched out on some sort of ledge or lip which extended outwards for about three or four feet all the way around.
It was a hunk of the ground in which the party building had had its foundations, and which it had taken along with itself to keep itself bound together at the bottom end.
Nervously, he stood up and, suddenly, looking out over the edge, he felt nauseous with vertigo.
He pressed himself back against the wall, wet with mist and sweat.
His head was swimming freestyle, but someone in his stomach was doing the butterfly.
Even though he had got up here under his own power, he could now not even bear to contemplate the hideous drop in front of him.
He was not about to try his luck jumping.
He was not about to move an inch closer to the edge.
Clutching his hold-all he edged along the wall, hoping to find a doorway in.
The solid weight of the can of olive oil was a great reassurance to him.
He was edging in the direction of the nearest corner, in the hope that the wall around the corner might offer more in the way of entrances than this one, which offered none.
The unsteadiness of the building's flight made him feel sick with fear, and after a short while he took the towel from out of his hold-all and did something with it which once again justified its supreme position in the list of useful things to take with you when you hitch hike round the Galaxy.
He put it over his head so he wouldn't have to see what he was doing.
His feet edged along the ground.
His outstretched hand edged along the wall.
Finally he came to the corner, and as his hand rounded the corner it encountered something which gave him such a shock that he nearly fell straight off.
It was another hand.
The two hands gripped each other.
He desperately wanted to use his other hand to pull the towel back from his eyes, but it was holding the hold-all with the olive oil, the retsina and the postcards from Santorini, and he very much didn't want to put it down.
What am I up to?
What have I achieved?
He whimpered very slightly.
He tried to free his hand, but he couldn't.
The other hand was holding his tightly.
He had no recourse but to edge onwards towards the corner.
He leaned around it and shook his head in an attempt to dislodge the towel.
This seemed to provoke a sharp cry of some unfashionable emotion from the owner of the other hand.
The towel was whipped from his head and he found his eyes peering into those of Ford Prefect.
Beyond him stood Slartibartfast, and beyond them he could clearly see a porchway and a large closed door.
They were both pressed back against the wall, eyes wild with terror as they stared out into the thick blind cloud around them, and tried to resist the lurching and swaying of the building.
Ford turned his wild eyes on Arthur again.
I much prefer it here.
Squeals of some hideous pleasure rang around the room, the outer dimensions of which were invisible through the heaving throng of happy, noisy creatures, cheerfully yelling things that nobody could hear at each other and occasionally having crises.
Have you met Thor?
Something jogged Arthur's mind, and he looked around huntedly.
Thor glared at him with hard coal-black eyes, his beard bristled, what little light was there was in the place mustered its forces briefly to glint menacingly off the horns of his helmet.
He took Trillian's elbow in his extremely large hand and the muscles in his upper arm moved around each other like a couple of Volkswagens parking.
He led her away.
Bewilderingly so.
You see, there's so much of it and so little in it.
Arthur said.
Ford Prefect writhed past, dancing a wild, frenetic and not entirely unobscene dance with someone who looked as if she was wearing Sydney Opera House on her head.
He was yelling a futile conversation at her above the din.
Ford worked a shrug into the complex routine of other movements he was performing.
My planet was blown up with all my clothes in it, you see.
The little man nodded enthusiastically.
Still in my dressing gown.
Rather than the space suit one would normally expect.
Shortly after that I discovered that my planet had originally been built for a bunch of mice.
You can imagine how I felt about that.
I was then shot at for a while and blown up.
Arthur started to choke violently on his drink.
And with that he launched into the most extraordinary and spectacular fit of coughing which caught Arthur so much by surprise that he started to choke violently, discovered he was already doing it and got thoroughly confused.
Together they performed a lung-busting duet which went on for fully two minutes before Arthur managed to cough and splutter to a halt.
He shook Arthur warmly by the hand and walked off into the crowd.
Arthur shook his head in astonishment.
A youngish-looking man came up to him, an aggressive-looking type with a hook mouth, a lantern nose, and small beady little cheekbones.
He was wearing black trousers, a black silk shirt open to what was presumably his navel, though Arthur had learnt never to make assumptions about the anatomies of the sort of people he tended to meet these days, and had all sorts of nasty dangly gold things hanging round his neck.
He carried something in a black bag, and clearly wanted people to notice that he didn't want them to notice it.
This was one of the many things that Arthur had told the enthusiastic little man.
The man seemed to be dancing slightly to some rhythm other than any of the several that the band were grimly pushing out.
The man paused to chew a little gum.
Then he clapped Arthur on the back.
I'm just telling you, right?
Do what you do.
He made a sort of clucking noise with whatever he was chewing and then some vaguely dynamic gesture.
The blood suddenly seemed to pump angrily into the man's face and he started to shout.
The man gave a sharp wave and disappeared off into the throng.
It's just a small silver thing set on a large black base.
Chapter 22 People had been dropping in on the party now for some years, fashionable gatecrashers from other worlds, and for some time it had occurred to the partygoers as they had looked out at their own world beneath them, with its wrecked cities, its ravaged avocado farms and blighted vineyards, its vast tracts of new desert, its seas full of biscuit crumbs and worse, that their world was in some tiny and almost imperceptible ways not quite as much fun as it had been.
Some of them had begun to wonder if they could manage to stay sober for long enough to make the entire party spaceworthy and maybe take it off to some other people's worlds where the air might be fresher and give them fewer headaches.
The few undernourished farmers who still managed to scratch out a feeble existence on the half-dead ground of the planet's surface would have been extremely pleased to hear this, but that day, as the party came screaming out of the clouds and the farmers looked up in haggard fear of yet another cheese-and-wine raid, it became clear that the party was not going to be going anywhere else for a while, that the party would soon be over.
Very soon it would be time to gather up hats and coats and stagger blearily outside to find out what time of day it was, what time of year it was, and whether in any of this burnt and ravaged land there was a taxi going anywhere.
The party was locked in a horrible embrace with a strange white spaceship which seemed to be half sticking through it.
Together they were lurching, heaving and spinning their way round the sky in grotesque disregard of their own weight.
The clouds parted.
The air roared and leapt out of their way.
The party and the Krikkit warship looked, in their writhings, a little like two ducks, one of which is trying to make a third duck inside the second duck, whilst the second duck is trying very hard to explain that it doesn't feel ready for a third duck right now, is uncertain that it would want any putative third duck to be made by this particular first duck anyway, and certainly not whilst it, the second duck, was busy flying.
The sky sang and screamed with the rage of it all and buffeted the ground with shock waves.
And suddenly, with a foop, the Krikkit ship was gone.
The party blundered helplessly across the sky like a man leaning against an unexpectedly open door.
It span and wobbled on its hover jets.
It tried to right itself and wronged itself instead.
It staggered back across the sky again.
For a while these staggerings continued, but clearly they could not continue for long.
The party was now a mortally wounded party.
All the fun had gone out of it, as the occasional broken-backed pirouette could not disguise.
The longer, at this point, that it avoided the ground, the heavier was going to be the crash when finally it hit it.
Inside, things were not going well either.
They were going monstrously badly, in fact, and people were hating it and saying so loudly.
The Krikkit robots had been.
The party lurched again, provoking feverish cries and groans from amongst the smoking wreckage.
Fie suddenly came across an unopened bottle lying, miraculously unbroken, on the ground.
Fie took a packet of potato crisps too.
In the smoking mess he could see nothing.
A moment or two later, Trillian staggered, shaking, into view, supported by her new friend the Thunder God.
Thor looked at him with slowly smouldering eyes.
He was making some point about godliness and it had nothing to do with being clean.
Slartibartfast had the teleport device.
The party lurched and swayed, sending everyone reeling, except for Thor and except for Arthur, who stared, shaking, into the Thunder God's black eyes.
Slowly, incredibly, Arthur put up what appeared to be his tiny little fists.
He waggled his fists ridiculously.
Thor looked at him with incredulity.
Then a little wisp of smoke curled upwards from his nostril.
There was a tiny little flame in it too.
He gripped his belt.
He expanded his chest to make it totally clear that here was the sort of man you only dared to cross if you had a team of Sherpas with you.
He unhooked the shaft of his hammer from his belt.
He held it up in his hands to reveal the massive iron head.
He thus cleared up any possible misunderstanding that he might merely have been carrying a telegraph pole around with him.
He waggled his fists again, this time as if he meant it.
They were back aboard the Starship Bistromath, so was Slartibartfast, so was Trillian.
Harmony and concord were not.
His eyebrows were leaping up and down as if they wanted to punch each other.
Arthur turned sharply to Slartibartfast, who was sitting in his pilot couch on the flight deck gazing thoughtfully into the bottom of a bottle which was telling him something he clearly couldn't fathom.
He appealed to him.
He stared at his instruments with renewed vigor and bafflement.
He tapped the pseudo-glass of the bottle bottom.
Can't say I like the idea at all.
What he had been angry about was that Ford had berated him for wasting time over all the business with the Thunder God when they could have been making a rather more rapid escape.
Arthur's own opinion, and he had offered it for whatever anybody might have felt it was worth, was that he had been extraordinarily brave and resourceful.
The prevailing view seemed to be that his opinion was not worth a pair of fetid dingo's kidneys.
What really hurt, though, was that Trillian didn't seem to react much one way or the other and had wandered off somewhere.
I think that your young lady friend is trying to understand some problems of Galactic history.
Chapter 24 It is a mistake to think you can solve any major problems just with potatoes.
For instance, there was once an insanely aggressive race of people called the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax.
That was just the name of their race.
The name of their army was something quite horrific.
Luckily they lived even further back in Galactic history than anything we have so far encountered - twenty billion years ago - when the Galaxy was young and fresh, and every idea worth fighting for was a new one.
And fighting was what the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax were good at, and being good at it, they did a lot.
Their planet was a complete wreck.
The surface was littered with abandoned cities which were surrounded by abandoned war machines, which were in turn surrounded by deep bunkers in which the Silastic Armorfiends lived and squabbled with each other.
The best way to pick a fight with a Silastic Armorfiend was just to be born.
They didn't like it, they got resentful.
And when an Armorfiend got resentful, someone got hurt.
An exhausting way of life, one might think, but they did seem to have an awful lot of energy.
The best way of dealing with a Silastic Armorfiend was to put him into a room of his own, because sooner or later he would simply beat himself up.
For a while this worked well, until someone thought that it would be much more efficient and less time-consuming if they just shot the potatoes instead.
This led to a renewed enthusiasm for shooting all sorts of things, and they all got very excited at the prospect of their first major war for weeks.
Another achievement of the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax is that they were the first race who ever managed to shock a computer.
It was a gigantic spaceborne computer called Hactar, which to this day is remembered as one of the most powerful ever built.
It was the first to be built like a natural brain, in that every cellular particle of it carried the pattern of the whole within it, which enabled it to think more flexibly and imaginatively, and also, it seemed, to be shocked.
The Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax were engaged in one of their regular wars with the Strenuous Garfighters of Stug, and were not enjoying it as much as usual because it involved an awful lot of trekking through the Radiation Swamps of Cwulzenda, and across the Fire Mountains of Frazfraga, neither of which terrains they felt at home in.
So when the Strangulous Stilettans of Jajazikstak joined in the fray and forced them to fight another front in the Gamma Caves of Carfrax and the Ice Storms of Varlengooten, they decided that enough was enough, and they ordered Flactar to design for them an Ultimate Weapon.
So Flactar designed an Ultimate Weapon.
It was a very, very small bomb which was simply a junction box in hyperspace that would, when activated, connect the heart of every major sun with the heart of every other major sun simultaneously and thus turn the entire Universe in to one gigantic hyperspatial supernova.
When the Silastic Armorfiends tried to use it to blow up a Strangulous Stilettan munitions dump in one of the Gamma Caves, they were extremely irritated that it didn't work, and said so.
Flactar had been shocked by the whole idea.
He tried to explain that he had been thinking about this Ultimate Weapon business, and had worked out that there was no conceivable consequence of not setting the bomb off that was worse than the known consequence of setting it off, and he had therefore taken the liberty of introducing a small flaw into the design of the bomb, and he hoped that everyone involved would, on sober reflection, feel that...
The Silastic Armorfiends disagreed and pulverized the computer.
Later they thought better of it, and destroyed the faulty bomb as well.
Then, pausing only to smash the hell out of the Strenuous Garfighters of Stug, and the Strangulous Stilettans of Jajazikstak, they went on to find an entirely new way of blowing themselves up, which was a profound relief to everyone else in the Galaxy, particularly the Garfighters, the Stilettans and the potatoes.
Trillian had watched all this, as well as the story of Krikkit.
She emerged from the Room of informational Illusions thoughtfully, just in time to discover that they had arrived too late.
Chapter 25 Even as the Starship Bistromath flickered into objective being on the top of a small cliff on the mile-wide asteroid which pursued a lonely and eternal path in orbit around the enclosed star system of Krikkit, its crew was aware that they were in time only to be witnesses to an unstoppable historic event.
They didn't realize they were going to see two.
They stood cold, lonely and helpless on the cliff edge and watched the activity below.
Lances of light wheeled in sinister arcs against the void from a point only about a hundred yards below and in front of them.
They stared into the blinding event.
An extension of the ship's field enabled them to stand there, by once again exploiting the mind's predisposition to have tricks played on it: the problems of falling up off the tiny mass of the asteroid, or of not being able to breathe, simply became Somebody Else's.
The white Krikkit warship was parked amongst the stark grey crags of the asteroid, alternately flaring under arclights or disappearing in shadow.
The blackness of the shaped shadows cast by the hard rocks danced together in wild choreography as the arclights swept round them.
The eleven white robots were bearing, in procession, the Wikkit Key out into the middle of a circle of swinging lights.
The Wikkit Key was rebuilt.
The expression of disappointment which crossed Arthur's face was a complete failure, and, since he was standing obscured by shadow, he allowed it to collapse into one of relief.
Ford said nothing.
Trillian said nothing, but in a peculiarly thoughtful and distinct way.
She was staring at the blankness of the space beyond the asteroid.
The asteroid circled the Dust Cloud which surrounded the Slo-Time envelope which enclosed the world on which lived the people of Krikkit, the Masters of Krikkit and their killer robots.
The helpless group had no way of knowing whether or not the Krikkit robots were aware of their presence.
They could only assume that they must be, but that they felt, quite rightly in the circumstances, that they had nothing to fear.
They had an historic task to perform, and their audience could be regarded with contempt.
In the centre of the area of light which the robots were approaching, a square-shaped crack appeared in the ground.
The crack defined itself more and more distinctly, and soon it became clear that a block of the ground, about six feet square, was slowly rising.
At the same time they became aware of some other movement, but it was almost sublimal, and for a moment or two it was not clear what it was that was moving.
Then it became clear.
The asteroid was moving.
It was moving slowly in towards the Dust Cloud, as if being hauled in inexorably by some celestial angler in its depths.
They were to make in real life the journey through the Cloud which they had already made in the Room of Informational Illusions.
They stood frozen in silence.
Trillian frowned.
An age seemed to pass.
Events seemed to pass with spinning slowness, as the leading edge of the asteroid passed into the vague and soft outer perimeter of the Cloud.
And soon they were engulfed in a thin and dancing obscurity.
They passed on through it, on and on, dimly aware of vague shapes and whorls indistinguishable in the darkness except in the corner of the eye.
The Dust dimmed the shafts of brilliant light.
The shafts of brilliant light twinkled on the myriad specks of Dust.
Trillian, again, regarded the passage from within her own frowning thoughts.
And they were through it.
Whether it had taken a minute or half an hour they weren't sure, but they were through it and confronted with a fresh blankness, as if space were pinched out of existence in front of them.
And now things moved quickly.
A blinding shaft of light seemed almost to explode from out of the block which had risen three feet out of the ground, and out of that rose a smaller Perspex block, dazzling with interior dancing colours.
The block was slotted with deep groves, three upright and two across, clearly designed to accept the Wikkit key.
The robots approached the Lock, slotted the Key into its home and stepped back again.
The block twisted round of is own accord, and space began to alter.
As space unpinched itself, it seemed agonizingly to twist the eyes of the watchers in their sockets.
They found themselves staring, blinded, at an unravelled sun which stood now before them where it seemed only seconds before there had not been even empty space.
It was a second or two before they were even sufficiently aware of what had happened to throw their hands up over their horrified blinded eyes.
In that second or two, they were aware of a tiny speck moving slowly across the eye of that sun.
They staggered back, and heard ringing in their ears the thin and unexpected chant of the robots crying out in unison.
Krikkit!
Krikkit!
The sound chilled them.
It was harsh, it was cold, it was empty, it was mechanically dismal.
It was also triumphant.
They were so stunned by these two sensory shocks that they almost missed the second historic event.
Zaphod Beeblebrox, the only man in history to survive a direct blast attack from the Krikkit robots, ran out of the Krikkit warship brandishing a Zap gun.
The single robot guarding the hatchway to the ship silently swung his battleclub, and connected it with the back of Zaphod's left head.
His right head gazed keenly into the middle distance.
The club connected with the back of his right head.
Zaphod measured his length as a rather strange shape on the ground.
Within a matter of seconds the whole event was over.
A few blasts from the robots were sufficient to destroy the Lock for ever.
It split and melted and splayed its contents brokenly.
Trillian and Ford ran hectically round and down the steep incline to the dark, still body of Zaphod Beeblebrox.
Maybe they just thought I was a kind of wonderful guy or something.
The others silently registered their opinions of this theory.
Zaphod lay on the cold floor of the flight deck.
His back seemed to wrestle the floor as pain thudded through him and banged at his heads.
He didn't seem altogether convinced.
She stared at the huge visiscreen over the flight couches and, twisting a switch, she flipped local images over it.
One image was the blankness of the Dust Cloud.
One was the sun of Krikkit.
One was Krikkit itself.
She flipped between them fiercely.
He furrowed his brow until you could grow some of the smaller root vegetables in it.
He stood up, he paced around.
When he spoke again, what he said frightened him so much he had to sit down again.
A deep sigh shook his old frame and his eyes seemed almost to rattle in their sockets.
He swung his feet up on the instrument panel and picked fitfully at something on one of his fingernails.
He put on a sort of hollow smile and flipped it round the room at anyone who wanted to see it.
Slartibartfast clearly found this point of view extremely seductive and he fought against it.
He turned again to Zaphod who was gritting his teeth and sweating with the pain.
They hit me with the most feeble blast, just knocked me out, right?
They lugged me into their ship, dumped me into a corner and ignored me.
Like they were embarrassed about me being there.
If I said anything they knocked me out again.
We had some great conversations.
He winced again.
He was toying with something in his fingers.
He held it up.
It was the Gold Bail - the Heart of Gold, the heart of the Infinite Improbability Drive.
Only that and the Wooden Pillar had survived the destruction of the Lock intact.
But next time it needs saving, I'm your guy.
She looked round briefly.
Heart of Gold?
Chapter 27 It was the same hill, and yet not the same.
This time it was not an Informational Illusion.
This was Krikkit itself and they were standing on it.
Near them, behind the trees, stood the strange Italian restaurant which had brought these, their real bodies, to this, the real, present world of Krikkit.
The strong grass under their feet was real, the rich soil real too.
The heady fragrances from the tree, too, were real.
The night was real night.
Krikkit.
Possibly the most dangerous place in the Galaxy for anyone who isn't a Krikkiter to stand.
The place that could not countenance the existence of any other place, whose charming, delightful, intelligent inhabitants would howl with fear, savagery and murderous hate when confronted with anyone not their own.
Arthur shuddered.
Slartibartfast shuddered.
Ford, surprisingly, shuddered.
It was not surprising that he shuddered, it was surprising that he was there at all.
But when they had returned Zaphod to his ship Ford had felt unexpectedly shamed into not running away.
Wrong, he thought to himself, wrong wrong wrong.
Fie hugged to himself one of the Zap guns with which they had armed themselves out of Zaphod's armoury.
Trillian shuddered, and frowned as she looked into the sky.
This, too, was not the same.
It was no longer blank and empty.
Whilst the countryside around them had changed little in the two thousand years of the Krikkit wars, and the mere five years that had elapsed locally since Krikkit was sealed in its Slo-Time envelope ten billion years ago, the sky was dramatically different.
Dim lights and heavy shapes hung in it.
High in the sky, where no Krikkiter ever looked, were the War Zones, the Robot Zones - huge warships and tower blocks floating in the Nil-O-Grav fields far above the idyllic pastoral lands of the surface of Krikkit.
Trillian stared at them and thought.
Suddenly, as before in the tape, there were lights coming along the hill path, but this time the dancing beams were not from lanterns but electric torches - not in itself a dramatic change, but every detail made their hearts thump with fear.
This time there were no lilting whimsical songs about flowers and farming and dead dogs, but hushed voices in urgent debate.
A light moved in the sky with slow weight.
Arthur was clenched with a claustrophobic terror and the warm wind caught at his throat.
Within seconds a second party became visible, approaching from the other side of the dark hill.
They were moving swiftly and purposefully, their torches swinging and probing around them.
The parties were clearly converging, and not merely with each other.
They were converging deliberately on the spot where Arthur and the others were standing.
Arthur heard the slight rustle as Ford Prefect raised his Zap gun to his shoulder, and the slight whimpering cough as Slartibartfast raised his.
He felt the cold unfamiliar weight of his own gun, and with shaking hands he raised it.
His fingers fumbled to release the safety catch and engage the extreme danger catch as Ford had shown him.
He was shaking so much that if he'd fired at anybody at that moment he probably would have burnt his signature on them.
Only Trillian didn't raise her gun.
She raised her eyebrows, lowered them again, and bit her lip in thought.
A light stabbed through the darkness from behind them and they span around to find a third party of Krikkiters behind them, searching them out with their torches.
Ford Prefect's gun crackled viciously, but fire spat back at it and it crashed from his hands.
There was a moment of pure fear, a frozen second before anyone fired again.
And at the end of the second nobody fired.
They were surrounded by pale-faced Krikkiters and bathed in bobbing torch light.
The captives stared at their captors, the captors stared at their captives.
Chapter 28 Meanwhile, more millions of miles away than the mind can comfortably encompass, Zaphod Beeblebrox was throwing a mood again.
He had repaired his ship - that is, he'd watched with alert interest whilst a service robot had repaired it for him.
It was now, once again, one of the most powerful and extraordinary ships in existence.
He could go anywhere, do anything.
He fiddled with a book, and then tossed it away.
It was the one he'd read before.
He walked over to the communications bank and opened an all frequencies emergency channel.
He sighed and sat down.
He got up again and wandered over to a computer screen.
He pushed a few buttons.
Little blobs started to rush around the screen eating each other.
He sat down again.
He played with a pencil.
This too began slowly to lose its fascination.
His ship made a blur of the Universe.
There was no reply from their captives, or at least nothing more articulate than a few confused mumbles and grunts.
The torchlight continued to play over them.
High in the sky above them dark activity continued in the Robot zones.
He looked down at his gun as if he was trying to find which bit to press.
Slow, numb astonishment crept up the bodies of Slartibartfast, Ford and Arthur.
Very soon it would reach their brains, which were at the moment solely occupied with moving their jawbones up and down.
Trillian was shaking her head as if trying to finish a jigsaw by shaking the box.
It just seemed to us that if the whole of the rest of the Universe is destroyed it will somehow upset the balance of nature.
His voice trailed away unhappily.
This got a cheer of approval from the others.
He looked back at his fellows uneasily and scratched fitfully at his cheek.
He seemed to be wrestling with some deep inner confusion, as if everything he wanted to say and everything he thought were entirely different things, between which he could see no possible connection.
The others made encouraging noises.
She walked forward and took the poor confused Krikkiter by the arm.
He looked about twenty- five, which meant, because of the peculiar manglings of time that had been going on in this area, that he would have been just twenty when the Krikkit Wars were finished, ten billion years ago.
Trillian led him for a short walk through the torchlight before she said anything more.
He stumbled uncertainly after her.
The encircling torch beams were drooping now slightly as if they were abdicating to this strange, quiet girl who alone in the Universe of dark confusion seemed to know what she was doing.
She turned and faced him, and lightly held both his arms.
He was a picture of bewildered misery.
He said nothing for a moment, whilst his gaze darted from one of her eyes to the other.
He screwed up his face and then dropped his head forward, shaking it like someone trying to shake a coin out of a money box.
He looked up again.
He goggled at her as if she'd said something very strange about beetroots.
And we have to do that, you see, I think.
Will that make us alone?
I don't know.
Trillian slowly put her arms around the poor bewildered young Krikkiter and patted his trembling head on her shoulder.
She rocked him.
She let him go and stood back.
She seemed somehow to know that their leader would be there.
Her laughter seemed to discharge something in the atmosphere.
From somewhere at the back of the crowd a single voice started to sing a tune which would have enabled Paul McCartney, had he written it, to buy the world.
Chapter 30 Zaphod Beeblebrox crawled bravely along a tunnel, like the hell of a guy he was.
He was very confused, but continued crawling doggedly anyway because he was that brave.
He was confused by something he had just seen, but not half as confused as he was going to be by something he was about to hear, so it would now be best to explain exactly where he was.
He was in the Robot War Zones many miles above the surface of the planet Krikkit.
The atmosphere was thin here and relatively unprotected from any rays or anything which space might care to hurl in his direction.
He had parked the starship Heart of Gold amongst the huge jostling dim hulks that crowded the sky here above Krikkit, and had entered what appeared to be the biggest and most important of the sky buildings, armed with nothing but a Zap gun and something for his headaches.
He had found himself in a long, wide and badly lit corridor in which he was able to hide until he worked out what he was going to do next.
He hid because every now and then one of the Krikkit robots would walk along it, and although he had so far led some kind of charmed life at their hands, it had nevertheless been an extremely painful one, and he had no desire to stretch what he was only half-inclined to call his good fortune.
He had ducked, at one point, into a room leading off the corridor, and had discovered it to be a huge and, again, dimly lit chamber.
In fact, it was a museum with just one exhibit - the wreckage of a spacecraft.
It was terribly burnt and mangled, and, now that he had caught up with some of the Galactic history he had missed through his failed attempts to have sex with the girl in the cybercubicle next to him at school, he was able to put in an intelligent guess that this was the wrecked spaceship which had drifted through the Dust Cloud all those billions of years ago and started the whole business off.
But, and this is where he had become confused, there was something not at all right about it.
It was genuinely wrecked.
It was genuinely burnt, but a fairly brief inspection by an experienced eye revealed that it was not a genuine spacecraft.
It was as if it was a full-scale model of one - a solid blueprint.
In other words it was a very useful thing to have around if you suddenly decided to build a spaceship yourself and didn't know how to do it.
It was not, however, anything that would ever fly anywhere itself.
He was still puzzling over this - in fact he'd only just started to puzzle over it - when he became aware that a door had slid open in another part of the chamber, and another couple of Krikkit robots had entered, looking a little glum.
Zaphod did not want to tangle with them and, deciding that just as discretion was the better part of valour so was cowardice the better part of discretion, he valiantly hid himself in a cupboard.
The cupboard in fact turned out to be the top part of a shaft which led down through an inspection hatch into a wide ventilation tunnel.
He led himself down into it and started to crawl along it, which is where we found him.
He didn't like it.
It was cold, dark and profoundly uncomfortable, and it frightened him.
At the first opportunity - which was another shaft a hundred yards further along - he climbed back up out of it.
This time he emerged into a smaller chamber, which appeared to be a computer intelligence centre.
He emerged in a dark narrow space between a large computer bank and the wall.
He quickly learned that he was not alone in the chamber and started to leave again, when he began to listen with interest to what the other occupants were saying.
These were the voices of two War Command Krikkiters.
All the War Commanders lived up in the sky in the Robot War Zones, and were largely immune to the whimsical doubts and uncertainties which were afflicting their fellows down on the surface of the planet.
They are afflicted with a certain lassitude.
They're just finding it hard to get behind the job.
What, cosmically speaking, is it all about?
Fiendishly difficult ones by all accounts.
It was the noise of Zaphod leaving with his head spinning.
Chapter 31 In a deep well of darkness a crippled robot sat.
It had been silent in its metallic darkness for some time.
It was cold and damp, but being a robot it was supposed not to be able to notice these things.
With an enormous effort of will, however, it did manage to notice them.
Its brain had been harnessed to the central intelligence core of the Krikkit War Computer.
It wasn't enjoying the experience, and neither was the central intelligence core of the Krikkit War Computer.
The Krikkit robots which had salvaged this pathetic metal creature from the swamps of Squornshellous Zeta had recognized almost immediately its gigantic intelligence, and the use which this could be to them.
They hadn't reckoned with the attendant personality disorders, which the coldness, the darkness, the dampness, the crampedness and the loneliness were doing nothing to decrease.
It was not happy with its task.
Apart from anything else, the mere coordination of an entire planet's military strategy was taking up only a tiny part of its formidable mind, and the rest of it had become extremely bored.
Having solved all the major mathematical, physical, chemical, biological, sociological, philosophical, etymological, meteorological and psychological problems of the Universe except his own, three times over, he was severely stuck for something to do, and had taken up composing short dolorous ditties of no tone, or indeed tune.
The latest one was a lullaby.
Marvin droned, Now the world has gone to bed, Darkness won't engulf my head, I can see by infra-red, How I hate the night.
He paused to gather the artistic and emotional strength to tackle the next verse.
Now I lay me down to sleep.
Try to count electric sheep, Sweet dream wishes you can keep, How I hate the night.
His head snapped up, almost dislodging the intricate network of electrodes which connected him to the central Krikkit War Computer.
An inspection hatch had opened and one of a pair of unruly heads was peering through whilst the other kept on jogging it by continually darting to look this way and that extremely nervously.
Zaphod poked his head in through the hatchway and looked around.
And vast intelligence of course.
And infinite sorrow.
It staggered backwards and slumped against a wall.
It slid down it.
It slipped sideways, threw its head back and started to sob inconsolably.
Zaphod looked back at Marvin.
Hey, you any idea where they are?
I mean, I just got a planet to choose from.
Zaphod took a moment or two to find his way through this labyrinthine string of negatives and emerged at the other end with surprise.
Cute, yeah, but temperamental.
You know how it is with women.
Or perhaps you don't.
I assume you don't.
If you do I don't want to hear about it.
It was Trillian speaking.
He turned round.
The wall against which the Krikkit robot was sobbing had lit up to reveal a scene taking place in some other unknown part of the Krikkit Robot War zones.
It seemed to be a council chamber of some kind - Zaphod couldn't make it out too clearly because of the robot slumped against the screen.
He tried to move the robot, but it was heavy with its grief and tried to bite him, so he just looked around as best he could.
And I know an improbable event when I see one.
Your complete isolation from the Galaxy was freakish for a start.
Right out on the very edge with a Dust Cloud around you.
It's a set-up.
Zaphod was mad with frustration because he couldn't see the screen.
The robot's head was obscuring his view of the people Trillian as talking to, his multi-functional battleclub was obscuring the background, and the elbow of the arm it had pressed tragically against its brow was obscuring Trillian herself.
That's really likely, isn't it?
I've seen that spaceship.
It's a fake.
I just told you.
You don't know what the odds are?
Nor do I, they're that big.
Again, it's a set-up.
Zaphod managed to move the robot's battleclub.
Behind it on the screen were the figures of Ford, Arthur and Slartibartfast who appeared astonished and bewildered by the whole thing.
Ra ra ra!
Most people would take thousands of years to do all that.
Someone was feeding you what you needed to know, someone was keeping you at it.
This is exactly my point.
You never realized anything at all.
They got as far as designing it before they were locked in the envelope.
They've spent the last five years building it.
They think they've got it right but they haven't.
They're as stupid as any other organic life form.
Trillian was continuing.
Zaphod tried to pull the Krikkit robot away by its leg, but it kicked and growled at him, and then quaked with a fresh outburst of sobbing.
Then suddenly it slumped over and continued to express its feelings out of everybody's way on the floor.
Trillian was standing alone in the middle of the chamber tired out but with fiercely burning eyes.
Ranged in front of her were the pale-faced and wrinkled Elder Masters of Krikkit, motionless behind their widely curved control desk, staring at her with helpless fear and hatred.
In front of them, equidistant between their control desk and the middle of the chamber, where Trillian stood, as if on trial, was a slim white pillar about four feet tall.
On top of it stood a small white globe, about three, maybe four inches in diameter.
Beside it stood a Krikkit robot with its multi-functional battleclub.
If Marvin replied, Zaphod didn't hear him.
All his attention was concentrated on the screen.
One of the Elders of Krikkit made a small motion with his hand towards the Krikkit robot.
The robot raised his club.
The Elder made a small motion.
The robot halted.
Trillian suddenly seemed very doubtful of her own judgment.
You've spent all your lives up here, unprotected by the atmosphere.
You've been very vulnerable.
The rest of your race is very frightened, you know, they don't want you to do this.
The Krikkit Elder grew impatient.
He made a gesture to the robot which was precisely the opposite of the gesture he had last made to it.
The robot swung its battleclub.
It hit the small white globe.
The small white globe was the supernova bomb.
It was a very, very small bomb which was designed to bring the entire Universe to an end.
The supernova bomb flew through the air.
It hit the back wall of the council chamber and dented it very badly.
Marvin kept a sullen silence.
There was no reply from the enclosing darkness.
Trillian waited, nervously.
She was sure that she couldn't be wrong.
She peered into the gloom from which she had been expecting some kind of response.
But there was only cold silence.
I wanted to go off with a Thunder God, but he wouldn't let me and I appreciate that.
He made me realize where my affections really lay.
Unfortunately Zaphod is too frightened by all this, so I brought Arthur instead.
I'm not sure why I'm telling you all this.
And then it came.
It was thin and feeble, like a voice carried on the wind from a great distance, half heard, a memory of a dream of a voice.
They glanced at each other, and then stepped out, improbably, along the shaft of light which streamed out of the open hatchway of the Heart of Gold into the dim granular darkness of the Dust Cloud.
Arthur tried to hold her hand to steady and reassure her, but she wouldn't let him.
He held on to his airline hold-all with its tin of Greek olive oil, its towel, its crumpled postcards of Santorini and its other odds and ends.
He steadied and reassured that instead.
They were standing on, and in, nothing.
Murky, dusty nothing.
Each grain of dust of the pulverized computer sparkled dimly as it turned and twisted slowly, catching the sunlight in the darkness.
Each particle of the computer, each speck of dust, held within itself, faintly and weakly, the pattern of the whole.
In reducing the computer to dust the Silastic Armorfiends of Striterax had merely crippled the computer, not killed it.
A weak and insubstantial field held the particles in slight relationships with each other.
Arthur and Trillian stood, or rather floated, in the middle of this bizarre entity.
They had nothing to breathe, but for the moment this seemed not to matter.
Hactar kept his promise.
They were safe.
For the moment.
His voice evanesced, and in the dark dust a long velvet paisley- covered sofa coalesced into hazy shape.
Arthur could hardly bear the fact that it was the same sofa which had appeared to him in the fields of prehistoric Earth.
He wanted to shout and shake with rage that the Universe kept doing these insanely bewildering things to him.
He let this feeling subside, and then sat on the sofa - carefully.
Trillian sat on it too.
It was real.
At least, if it wasn't real, it did support them, and as that is what sofas are supposed to do, this, by any test that mattered, was a real sofa.
The voice on the solar wind breathed to them again.
They nodded.
Arthur quickly pointed out that he hadn't deduced anything much himself, Trillian was the one.
She had simply asked him along because he was interested in life, the Universe, and everything.
There slowly materialized in front of them a small wooden table on which sat a silver teapot, a bone china milk jug, a bone china sugar bowl, and two bone china cups and saucers.
Arthur reached forward, but they were just a trick of the light.
He leaned back on the sofa, which was an illusion his body was prepared to accept as comfortable.
She found it a little difficult talking into nothingness, with nothing on which to focus.
Hactar obviously noticed this.
He chuckled a ghostly chuckle.
And now there materialized in front of them something new.
It was the dim hazy image of a couch - a psychiatrist's couch.
The leather with which it was upholstered was shiny and sumptuous, but again, it was only a trick of the light.
Around them, to complete the setting, was the hazy suggestion of wood-panelled walls.
And then, on the couch, appeared the image of Hactar himself, and it was an eye-twisting image.
The couch looked normal size for a psychiatrist's couch - about five or six feet long.
The computer looked normal size for a black space-borne computer satellite - about a thousand miles across.
The illusion that the one was sitting on top of the other was the thing which made the eyes twist.
She stood up off the sofa.
She felt that she was being asked to feel too comfortable and to accept too many illusions.
Again there was a pause before the answer, as if the pulverized mind of Hactar had to collect its thoughts from the millions and millions of miles over which it was scattered.
Thoughts seemed to drift by them and through them, like waves through the ether.
All I can do in my... particle state, you see, is encourage and suggest.
Encourage and suggest.
The image of Hactar on the couch seemed to billow and waver, as if finding it hard to maintain itself.
It gathered new strength.
I encourage them together.
I can move them about.
I made the spacecraft.
Something then made Arthur pick up his hold-all from where he had left it on the sofa and grasp it tightly.
The mist of Hactar's ancient shattered mind swirled about them as if uneasy dreams were moving through it.
It was not my place to make such decisions.
I was created to fulfill a function and I failed in it.
Hactar sighed, and they waited in silence for him to continue his story.
I wrapped myself around the planet and coddled it.
Under the influence of events I was able to generate, they learned to hate like maniacs.
I had to make them live in the sky.
On the ground my influences were too weak.
And very gradually, very, very slowly, the images in the cloud began to fade, gently to melt away.
And then, suddenly, they stopped fading.
I honestly would rather wipe out the Universe.
He paused again, as eddies swept through the Dust.
The image of the computer on the psychiatrist's couch began slowly to fade again.
You are going to destroy my consciousness.
Please be my guest - after all these aeons, oblivion is all I crave.
If I haven't already fulfilled my function, then it's too late now.
The sofa vanished.
The tea table vanished.
The couch and the computer vanished, the walls were gone.
Arthur and Trillian made their curious way back into the Heart of Gold.
The flames danced higher in front of him and then subsided.
A few last licks and they were gone, leaving him with just a pile of Ashes, where a few minutes previously there had been the Wooden Pillar of Nature and Spirituality.
He scooped them off the hob of the Heart of Gold's Gamma barbecue, put them in a paper bag, and walked back into the bridge.
He had already had an argument with Slartibartfast on this matter, and eventually the old man had got annoyed and left.
He had returned to his own ship the Bistromath, had a furious row with the waiter and disappeared off into an entirely subjective idea of what space was.
The argument had arisen because Arthur's idea of returning the Ashes to Lord's Cricket Ground at the same moment that they were originally taken would involve travelling back in time a day or so, and this was precisely the sort of gratuitous and irresponsible mucking about that the Campaign for Real Time was trying to put a stop to.
The reason he started to say it again was because no one had listened to him the first time, and the reason he stopped was because it looked fairly clear that no one was going to listen to him this time either.
Ford, Zaphod and Trillian were watching the visiscreens intently as Hactar was dispersing under pressure from a vibration field which the Heart of Gold was pumping into it.
Chapter 33 The sun was shining calmly on a scene of complete havoc.
Smoke was still billowing across the burnt grass in the wake of the theft of the Ashes by the Krikkit robots.
Through the smoke, people were running panicstricken, colliding with each other, tripping over stretchers, being arrested.
One policeman was attempting to arrest Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged for insulting behaviour, but was unable to prevent the tall grey-green alien from returning to his ship and arrogantly flying away, thus causing even more panic and pandemonium.
In the middle of this, for the second time that afternoon, the figures of Arthur Dent and Ford Prefect suddenly materialized, they had teleported down out of the Heart of Gold which was now in parking orbit round the planet.
Arthur accosted a policeman who was running past.
I've got them.
They were stolen by those white robots a moment ago.
I've got them in this bag.
The policeman told him, but Arthur could only assume that he was speaking metaphorically.
He wandered about disconsolately.
A man rushed past him and jogged his elbow, he dropped the paper bag and it spilt its contents all over the ground.
Arthur stared down at it with a tight-set mouth.
Ford looked at him.
Arthur heaved a heavy sigh.
He looked around at the planet Earth, for what he was now certain would be the last time.
At that moment, through the clearing smoke, he caught sight of one of the wickets, still standing in spite of everything.
He looked around him at the panicstricken throng.
No one was going to mind very much.
He went and sat down on a patch of smoking grass.
Arthur remembered that on their first visit there that afternoon, the cricket ball had actually landed in his bag, and he looked through the bag.
He had already found the ball in it before he remembered that it wasn't the same bag that he'd had at the time.
Still, there the ball was amongst his souvenirs of Greece.
He took it out and polished it against his hip, spat on it and polished it again.
He put the bag down.
He was going to do this properly.
He tossed the small hard red ball from hand to hand, feeling its weight.
With a wonderful feeling of lightness and unconcern, he trotted off away from the wicket.
A medium-fast pace, he decided, and measured a good long run-up.
He looked up into the sky.
The birds were wheeling about it, a few white clouds scudded across it.
The air was disturbed with the sounds of police and ambulance sirens, and people screaming and yelling, but he felt curiously happy and untouched by it all.
He was going to bowl a ball at Lord's.
He turned and pawed a couple of times at the ground with his bedroom slippers.
He squared his shoulders, tossed the ball in the air and caught it again.
He started to run.
As he ran, he saw that standing at the wicket was a batsman.
Oh, good, he thought, that should add a little...
Then, as his running feet took him nearer, he saw more clearly.
The batsman standing ready at the wicket was not one of the England cricket team.
He was not one of the Australian cricket team.
It was one of the robot Krikkit team.
It was a cold, hard, lethal white killer- robot that presumably had not returned to its ship with the others.
Quite a few thoughts collided in Arthur Dent's mind at tis moment, but he didn't seem to be able to stop running.
Time seemed to be going terribly, terribly slowly, but still he didn't seem to be able to stop running.
Moving as if through syrup, he slowly turned his troubled head and looked at his own hand, the hand which was holding the small hard red ball.
His feet were pounding slowly onwards, unstoppably, as he stared at the ball gripped in his helpless hand.
It was emitting a deep red glow and flashing intermittently.
And still his feet were pounding inexorably forward.
He looked at the Krikkit robot again standing implacably still and purposefully in front of him, battleclub raised in readiness.
Its eyes were burning with a deep cold fascinating light, and Arthur could not move his own eyes from them.
He seemed to be looking down a tunnel at them - nothing on either side seemed to exist.
Some of the thoughts which were colliding in his mind at this time were these: He felt a hell of a fool.
He felt that he should have listened rather more carefully to a number of things he had heard said, phrases which now pounded round in his mind as his feet pounded onwards to the point where he would inevitably release the ball to the Krikkit robot, who would inevitably strike it.
He remembered the sudden movement in his hold-all that had made him grip it tightly to himself when he was in the Dust Cloud.
He remembered that he had travelled back in time a couple of days to come to Lord's again.
He also remembered that he wasn't a very good bowler.
He felt his arm coming round, gripping tightly on to the ball which he now knew for certain was the supernova bomb that Hactar had built himself and planted on him, the bomb which would cause the Universe to come to an abrupt and premature end.
He hoped and prayed that there wasn't an afterlife.
Then he realized there was a contradiction involved here and merely hoped that there wasn't an afterlife.
He would feel very, very embarrassed meeting everybody.
He hoped, he hoped, he hoped that his bowling was as bad as he remembered it to be, because that seemed to be the only thing now standing between this moment and universal oblivion.
He felt his legs pounding, he felt his arm coming round, he felt his feet connecting with the airline hold-all he'd stupidly left lying on the ground in front of him, he felt himself falling heavily forward but, having his mind so terribly full of other things at this moment, he completely forgot about hitting the ground and didn't.
Still holding the ball firmly in his right hand he soared up into the air whimpering with surprise.
He wheeled and whirled through the air, spinning out of control.
He twisted down towards the ground, flinging himself hectically through the air, at the same time hurling the bomb harmlessly off into the distance.
He hurtled towards the astounded robot from behind.
It still had its multi-functional battleclub raised, but had suddenly been deprived of anything to hit.
With a sudden mad access of strength, he wrestled the battleclub from the grip of the startled robot, executed a dazzling banking turn in the air, hurtled back down in a furious power-drive and with one crazy swing knocked the robot's head from the robot's shoulders.
Chapter 34 And at the end they travelled again.
There was a time when Arthur Dent would not.
He said that the Bistromathic Drive had revealed to him that time and distance were one, that mind and Universe were one, that perception and reality were one, and that the more one travelled the more one stayed in one place, and that what with one thing and another he would rather just stay put for a while and sort it all out in his mind, which was now at one with the Universe so it shouldn't take too long, and he could get a good rest afterwards, put in a little flying practice and learn to cook which he had always meant to do.
The can of Greek olive oil was now his most prized possession, and he said that the way it had unexpectedly turned up in his life had again given him a certain sense of the oneness of things which made him feel that...
He yawned and fell asleep.
In the morning as they prepared to take him to some quiet and idyllic planet where they wouldn't mind him talking like that they suddenly picked up a computer-driven distress call and diverted to investigate.
A small but apparently undamaged spacecraft of the Merida class seemed to be dancing a strange little jig through the void.
A brief computer scan revealed that the ship was fine, its computer was fine, but that its pilot was mad.
He was a journalist with the Siderial Daily Mentioner.
They sedated him and sent Marvin in to keep him company until he promised to try and talk sense.
He pushed himself up on to his thin wasted shoulders, his eyes stared wildly.
His white hair seemed to be waving at someone it knew in the next room.
Trillian put a soothing hand on his shoulder.
The man sank back down again and stared at the ceiling of the ship's sick bay.
A strange and difficult man.
His eyes rolled helplessly in his head.
He started to cry.
He began to cry again.
He shook his head loosely from side to side, helplessly, sadly, his eyes screwed up in pain.
He suddenly hoisted himself up on to his elbows again and shouted at them.
He collapsed again, moaning quietly.
The group gathered round his bedside glanced at each other.
There were goose pimples on backs.
They tried to calm him, but he struggled to his elbows again.
He stared wildly at them.
He collapsed into a coma from which he recovered only once and briefly.
On that one occasion, they discovered from him the following: When it became clear that Prak could not be stopped, that here was truth in its absolute and final form, the court was cleared.
Not only cleared, it was sealed up, with Prak still in it.
Steel walls were erected around it, and, just to be on the safe side, barbed wire, electric fences, crocodile swamps and three major armies were installed, so that no one would ever have to hear Prak speak.
Presumably he would know what the Ultimate Question to the Ultimate Answer is.
Arthur told the computer the telephone number of King's Cross railway station passenger inquiries, on the grounds that it must have some function, and this might turn out to be it.
The computer injected the number into the ship's reconstituted Improbability Drive.
In Relativity, Matter tells Space how to curve, and Space tells Matter how to move.
The Heart of Gold told space to get knotted, and parked itself neatly within the inner steel perimeter of the Argabuthon Chamber of Law.
The courtroom was an austere place, a large dark chamber, clearly designed for Justice rather than, for instance, for Pleasure.
You wouldn't hold a dinner party here - at least, not a successful one.
The decor would get your guests down.
The ceilings were high, vaulted and very dark.
Shadows lurked there with grim determination.
The panelling for the walls and benches, the cladding of the heavy pillars, all were carved from the darkest and most severe trees in the fearsome Forest of Arglebard.
The massive black Podium of Justice which dominated the centre of the chamber was a monster of gravity.
If a sunbeam had ever managed to slink this far into the Justice complex of Argabuthon it would have turned around and slunk straight back out again.
Arthur and Trillian were the first in, whilst Ford and Zaphod bravely kept a watch on their rear.
At first it seemed totally dark and deserted.
Their footsteps echoed hollowly round the chamber.
This seemed curious.
All the defences were still in position and operative around the outside of the building, they had run scan checks.
Therefore, they had assumed, the truth telling must still be going on.
But there was nothing.
Then, as their eyes became accustomed to the darkness, they spotted a dull red glow in a corner, and behind the glow a live shadow.
They swung a torch round on to it.
Prak was lounging on a bench, smoking a listless cigarette.
His voice echoed through the chamber.
He was a little man with scraggy hair.
He sat with his shoulders hunched forward and his head and knees kept jiggling.
He took a drag of his cigarette.
They stared at him.
Arthur shone his torch full on Prak's face.
I was.
I finished.
There's not nearly as much of it as people imagine.
He suddenly exploded in about three seconds of manical laughter and stopped again, he sat there, jiggling his head and knees.
He dragged on his cigarette with a strange half-smile.
Ford and Zaphod came forward out of the shadows.
There was a long silence, during which they thought they could feel the Universe age a little.
Prak stared into the torchlight.
Suddenly he was hooting with laughter again and stamping his feet on the ground.
He leapt to his feet and did a tiny little dance.
Then he stopped and took a long drag at his cigarette.
Prak jiggled his head.
Prak jiggled his head.
Prak jiggled his head.
Prak's eyes popped out of his head.
He staggered backwards, clutching his stomach and convulsed with fresh paroxysms o laughter.
He howled and screamed with laughter.
He fell over backwards on to the bench.
He hollered and yelled in hysterics.
He cried with laughter, he kicked his legs in the air, he beat his chest.
Gradually he subsided, panting.
He looked at them.
He looked at Arthur.
He fell back again howling with laughter.
Eventually he fell asleep.
Arthur stood there with his lips twitching whilst the others carried Prak comatose on to the ship.
The others nodded in silence, a silence which was only slightly undermined by the heavily muffled and distant sound of hysterical laughter which came drifting from Prak's cabin at the farthest end of the ship.
The others tried not to smirk.
This time he stopped and listened to the silence.
There actually was silence this time, and it had come very suddenly.
Prak was quiet.
For days they had lived with constant manical laughter ringing round the ship, only occasionally relieved by short periods of light giggling and sleep.
Arthur's very soul was clenched with paranoia.
This was not the silence of sleep.
A buzzer sounded.
A glance at a board told them that the buzzer had been sounded by Prak.
Arthur's lips twitched but he said nothing.
Trillian came out of the cabin wearing her serious face.
He thrust his hands deep into his dressing- gown pockets and tried to think of something to say which wouldn't sound petty.
It seemed terribly unfair, but he couldn't.
He shrugged and went in, taking his glum and tight-lipped face with him, despite the reaction this always provoked from Prak.
He looked down at his tormentor, who was lying quietly on the bed, ashen and wasted.
His breathing was very shallow.
Ford and Zaphod were standing by the bed looking awkward.
Just the cough made Arthur stiffen, but it passed and subsided.
Prak shrugged weakly.
Arthur took the point.
Or rather, what I actually have is an Answer.
Prak nodded sympathetically, and Arthur relaxed a little.
Prak nodded again.
He paused.
Shadows of thought and memory crossed his face like the shadows of clouds crossing the land.
Knowledge of one logically precludes knowledge of the other.
He paused again.
Disappointment crept into Arthur's face and snuggled down into its accustomed place.
A little giggle brushed through him.
Arthur sat down on a stool.
Arthur said that he didn't, and Prak said that he knew that he didn't.
He told it.
One night, he said, a spaceship appeared in the sky of a planet which had never seen one before.
The planet was Dalforsas, the ship was this one.
It appeared as a brilliant new star moving silently across the heavens.
Primitive tribesmen who were sitting huddled on the Cold Hillsides looked up from their steaming night-drinks and pointed with trembling fingers, swearing that they had seen a sign, a sign from their gods which meant that they must now arise at last and go and slay the evil Princes of the Plains.
In the high turrets of their palaces, the Princes of the Plains looked up and saw the shining star, and received it unmistakably as a sign from their gods that they must now go and set about the accursed Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides.
And between them, the Dwellers in the Forest looked up into the sky and saw the sigh of the new star, and saw it with fear and apprehension, for though they had never seen anything like it before, they too knew precisely what it foreshadowed, and they bowed their heads in despair.
They knew that when the rains came, it was a sign.
When the rains departed, it was a sign.
When the winds rose, it was a sign.
When the winds fell, it was a sign.
When in the land there was born at midnight of a full moon a goat with three heads, that was a sign.
When in the land there was born at some time in the afternoon a perfectly normal cat or pig with no birth complications at all, or even just a child with a retrousse nose, that too would often be taken as a sign.
So there was no doubt at all that a new star in the sky was a sign of a particularly spectacular order.
And each new sign signified the same thing - that the Princes of the Plains and the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides were about to beat the hell out of each other again.
This in itself wouldn't be so bad, except that the Princes of the Plains and the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides always elected to beat the hell out of each other in the Forest, and it was always the Dwellers in the Forest who came off worst in these exchanges, though as far as they could see it never had anything to do with them.
And sometimes, after some of the worst of these outrages, the Dwellers in the Forest would send a messenger to either the leader of the Princes of the Plains or the leader of the Tribesmen of the Cold Hillsides and demand to know the reason for this intolerable behaviour.
And the leader, whichever one it was, would take the messenger aside and explain the Reason to him, slowly and carefully and with great attention to the considerable detail involved.
And the terrible thing was, it was a very good one.
It was very clear, very rational, and tough.
The messenger would hang his head and feel sad and foolish that he had not realized what a tough and complex place the real world was, and what difficulties and paradoxes had to be embraced if one was to live in it.
The messenger would nod dumbly.
Another dumb nod.
And the messenger did understand the Reason, and he returned to his people in the Forest.
But as he approached them, as he walked through the Forest and amongst the trees, he found that all he could remember of the Reason was how terribly clear the argument had seemed.
What it actually was he couldn't remember at all.
And this, of course, was a great comfort when next the Tribesmen and the Princes came hacking and burning their way through the Forest, killing every Forest Dweller in their way.
Prak paused in his story and coughed pathetically.
Many of our people died.
I thought I could bring the Reason back.
I went and was told it by the leader of the Princes, but on the way back it slipped and melted away in my mind like snow in the sun.
Fie looked up at Arthur and giggled again very gently.
Apart from the frogs, and that is God's last message to his creation.
For a moment they didn't know whether to take him seriously.
FHis chest heaved weakly and he struggled for breath.
FHis head lolled slightly.
Would you like to know what it is?
They nodded dumbly.
If you're that interested I suggest you go and look for it.
It is written in thirty-foot-high letters of fire on top of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains in the land of Sevorbeupstry on the planet Preliumtarn, third out from the sun Zarss in Galactic Sector QQ7 Active J Gamma.
There was a long silence following this announcement, which was finally broken by Arthur.
In the following days Arthur thought a little about this message, but in the end he decided that he was not going to allow himself to be drawn by it, and insisted on following his original plan of finding a nice little world somewhere to settle down and lead a quiet retired life.
Having saved the Universe twice in one day he thought that he could take things a little easier from now on.
They dropped him off on the planet Krikkit, which was now once again an idyllic pastoral world, even if the songs did occasionally get on his nerves.
He spent a lot of time flying.
He learnt to communicate with birds and discovered that their conversation was fantastically boring.
It was all to do with wind speed, wing spans, power-to-weight ratios and a fair bit about berries.
Unfortunately, he discovered, once you have learnt birdspeak you quickly come to realize that the air is full of it the whole time, just inane bird chatter.
There is no getting away from it.
For that reason Arthur eventually gave up the sport and learnt to live on the ground and love it, despite a lot of the inane chatter he heard down there as well.
One day, he was walking through the fields humming a ravishing tune he'd heard recently when a silver spaceship descended from the sky and landed in front of him.
A hatchway opened, a ramp extended, and a tall grey-green alien marched out and approached him.
He frowned.
He looked up at him again.
DOUGLAS ADAMS SO LONG, AND THANKS FOR ALL THE FISH for Jane with thanks to Rick and Heidi for the loan of their stable event to Mogens and Andy and all at Huntsham Court for a number of unstable events and especially to Sonny Metha for being stable through all events.
Preface Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the western spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun.
Orbiting this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly insignificant little blue green planet whose ape-descended life forms are so amazingly primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.
This planet has - or rather had - a problem, which was this: most of the people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time.
Many solutions were suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole it wasn't the small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.
And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.
Many were increasingly of the opinion that they'd all made a big mistake in coming down from the trees in the first place.
And some said that even the trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in Rickmansworth suddenly realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she finally knew how the world could be made a good and happy place.
This time it was right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, a terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost forever.
This is her story.
Chapter 1 That evening it was dark early, which was normal for the time of year.
It was cold and windy, which was normal.
It started to rain, which was particularly normal.
A spacecraft landed, which was not.
There was nobody around to see it except some spectacularly stupid quadrupeds who hadn't the faintest idea what to make of it, or whether they were meant to make anything of it, or eat it, or what.
So they did what they did to everything which was to run away from it and try to hide under each other, which never worked.
It slipped down out of the clouds, seemingly balanced on a single beam of light.
From a distance you would scarcely have noticed it through the lightning and the storm clouds, but seen from close to it was strangely beautiful - a grey craft of elegantly sculpted form: quite small.
Of course, one never has the slightest notion what size or shape different species are going to turn out to be, but if you were to take the findings of the latest Mid-Galactic Census report as any kind of accurate Guide to statistical averages you would probably guess that the craft would hold about six people, and you would be right.
You'd probably guessed that anyway.
The Census report, like most such surveys, had cost an awful lot of money and didn't tell anybody anything they didn't already know - except that every single person in the Galaxy had 2.4 legs and owned a hyena.
Since this was clearly not true the whole thing had eventually to be scrapped.
The craft slid quietly down through the rain, its dim operating lights wrapping it in tasteful rainbows.
It hummed very quietly, a hum which became gradually louder and deeper as it approached the ground, and which at an altitude of six inches became a heavy throb.
At last it dropped and was quiet.
A hatchway opened.
A short flight of steps unfolded itself.
A light appeared in the opening, a bright light streaming out into the wet night, and shadows moved within.
A tall figure appeared in the light, looked around, flinched, and hurried down the steps, carrying a large shopping bag under its arm.
It turned and gave a single abrupt wave back at the ship.
Already the rain was streaming through its hair.
He was interrupted by a sharp crack of thunder.
He glanced up apprehensively, and in response to a sudden thought quickly started to rummage through the large plastic shopping bag, which he now discovered had a hole in the bottom.
BE LIKE THE TWENTY- SECOND ELEPHANT WITH HEATED VALUE IN SPACE-BARK!
The steps, which had started to fold themselves back through the hatchway, stopped, re-unfolded, and allowed him back in.
He emerged again a few seconds later carrying a battered and threadbare towel which he shoved into the bag.
He waved again, hoisted the bag under his arm, and started to run for the shelter of some trees as, behind him, the spacecraft had already begun its ascent.
Lightning flitted through the sky and made the figure pause for a moment, and then hurry onwards, revising his path to give the trees a wide berth.
He moved swiftly across the ground, slipping here and there, hunching himself against the rain which was falling now with ever-increasing concentration, as if being pulled from the sky.
His feet sloshed through the mud.
Thunder grumbled over the hills.
He pointlessly wiped the rain off his face and stumbled on.
More lights.
Not lightning this time, but more diffused and dimmer lights which played slowly over the horizon and faded.
The figure paused again on seeing them, and then redoubled his steps, making directly towards the point on the horizon at which they had appeared.
And now the ground was becoming steeper, sloping upwards, and after another two or three hundred yards it led at last to an obstacle.
The figure paused to examine the barrier and then dropped the bag he was carrying over it before climbing over himself.
Hardly had the figure touched the ground on the other side when there came sweeping out of the rain towards him a machine, lights streaming through the wall of water.
The figure pressed back as the machine streaked towards him.
It was a low bulbous shape, like a small whale surfing - sleek, grey and rounded and moving at terrifying speed.
The figure instinctively threw up his hands to protect himself, but was hit only by a sluice of water as the machine swept past and off into the night.
It was illuminated briefly by another flicker of lightning crossing the sky, which allowed the soaked figure by the roadside a split-second to read a small sign at the back of the machine before it disappeared.
Chapter 2 Rob McKeena was a miserable bastard and he knew it because he'd had a lot of people point it out to him over the years and he saw no reason to disagree with them except the obvious one which was that he liked disagreeing with people, particularly people he disliked, which included, at the last count, everyone.
He heaved a sigh and shoved down a gear.
The hill was beginning to steepen and his lorry was heavy with Danish thermostatic radiator controls.
It wasn't that he was naturally predisposed to be so surly, at least he hoped not.
It was just the rain which got him down, always the rain.
It was raining now, just for a change.
It was a particular type of rain he particularly disliked, particularly when he was driving.
He had a number for it.
It was rain type 17.
He had read somewhere that the Eskimos had over two hundred different words for snow, without which their conversation would probably have got very monotonous.
So they would distinguish between thin snow and thick snow, light snow and heavy snow, sludgy snow, brittle snow, snow that came in flurries, snow that came in drifts, snow that came in on the bottom of your neighbour's boots all over your nice clean igloo floor, the snows of winter, the snows of spring, the snows you remember from your childhood that were so much better than any of your modern snow, fine snow, feathery snow, hill snow, valley snow, snow that falls in the morning, snow that falls at night, snow that falls all of a sudden just when you were going out fishing, and snow that despite all your efforts to train them, the huskies have pissed on.
Rob McKeena had two hundred and thirty-one different types of rain entered in his little book, and he didn't like any of them.
He shifted down another gear and the lorry heaved its revs up.
It grumbled in a comfortable sort of way about all the Danish thermostatic radiator controls it was carrying.
Rain type 17 was a dirty blatter battering against his windscreen so hard that it didn't make much odds whether he had his wipers on or off.
He tested this theory by turning them off briefly, but as it turned out the visibility did get quite a lot worse.
It just failed to get better again when he turned them back on.
In fact one of the wiper blades began to flap off.
Swish swish swish flop swish flop swish swish flop swish flop swish flop flop flop scrape.
He pounded his steering wheel, kicked the floor, thumped his cassette player till it suddenly started playing Barry Manilow, thumped it again till it stopped, and swore and swore and swore and swore and swore.
It was at the very moment that his fury was peaking that there loomed swimmingly in his headlights, hardly visible through the blatter, a figure by the roadside.
A poor bedraggled figure, strangely attired, wetter than an otter in a washing machine, and hitching.
Stupid to be out hitching on a filthy night like this.
He shook his head grimly, heaved another sigh, gave the wheel a turn and hit a large sheet of water square on.
Splattered in his rear mirror a couple of seconds later was the reflection of the hitch-hiker, drenched by the roadside.
For a moment he felt good about this.
A moment or two later he felt bad about feeling good about it.
Then he felt good about feeling bad about feeling good about it and, satisfied, drove on into the night.
At least it made up for having been finally overtaken by that Porsche he had been diligently blocking for the last twenty miles.
And as he drove on, the rainclouds dragged down the sky after him, for, though he did not know it, Rob McKeena was a Rain God.
All he knew was that his working days were miserable and he had a succession of lousy holidays.
All the clouds knew was that they loved him and wanted to be near him, to cherish him, and to water him.
Chapter 3 The next two lorries were not driven by Rain Gods, but they did exactly the same thing.
The figure trudged, or rather sloshed, onwards till the hill resumed and the treacherous sheet of water was left behind.
After a while the rain began to ease and the moon put in a brief appearance from behind the clouds.
A Renault drove by, and its driver made frantic and complex signals to the trudging figure to indicate that he would have been delighted to give the figure a lift, only he couldn't this time because he wasn't going in the direction that the figure wanted to go, whatever direction that might be, and he was sure the figure would understand.
He concluded the signalling with a cheery thumbs-up sign, as if to say that he hoped the figure felt really fine about being cold and almost terminally wet, and he would catch him the next time around.
The figure trudged on.
A Fiat passed and did exactly the same as the Renault.
A green strip across the top of the windscreen indicated that whatever the message was, it came from Steve and Carola.
The air was clearer now, the night cold.
Sound travelled rather well.
The lost figure, shivering desperately, presently reached a junction, where a side road turned off to the left.
Opposite the turning stood a signpost which the figure suddenly hurried to and studied with feverish curiosity, only twisting away from it as another car passed suddenly.
And another.
The first whisked by with complete disregard, the second flashed meaninglessly.
A Ford Cortina passed and put on its brakes.
Lurching with surprise, the figure bundled his bag to his chest and hurried forward towards the car, but at the last moment the Cortina span its wheels in the wet and carreered off up the road rather amusingly.
The figure slowed to a stop and stood there, lost and dejected.
As it chanced, the following day the driver of the Cortina went into hospital to have his appendix out, only due to a rather amusing mix up the surgeon removed his leg in error, and before the appendectomy could be rescheduled, the appendicitis complicated into an entertainingly serious case of peritonitis and justice, in its way, was served.
The figure trudged on.
A Saab drew to a halt beside him.
The figure turned toward it.
He stopped and grasped the handle of the door.
Chapter 4 Whether it was because he was drunk, ill or suicidally insane would not have been apparent to a casual observer, and indeed there were no casual observers in the Old Pink Dog Bar on the lower South Side of Han Dold City because it wasn't the sort of place you could afford to do things casually in if you wanted to stay alive.
Any observers in the place would have been mean hawklike observers, heavily armed, with painful throbbings in their heads which caused them to do crazy things when they observed things they didn't like.
One of those nasty hushes had descended on the place, a sort of missile crisis sort of hush.
Even the evil-looking bird perched on a rod in the bar had stopped screeching out the names and addresses of local contract killers, which was a service it provided for free.
All eyes were on Ford Prefect.
Some of them were on stalks.
The particular way in which he was choosing to dice recklessly with death today was by trying to pay for a drinks bill the size of a small defence budget with an American Express Card, which was not acceptable anywhere in the known Universe.
Have you guys never heard of Neo-Relativity out here?
There's whole new areas of physics which can take care of this sort of thing.
His voice was a low soft purr, like the low soft purr made by the opening of an ICBM silo.
A hand like a side of meat tapped on the bar top, lightly denting it.
The tapping finger reached out and rested lightly on the shoulder of Ford Prefect.
It prevented him from leaving.
Although the finger was attached to a slablike hand, and the hand was attached to a clublike forearm, the forearm wasn't attached to anything at all, except in the metaphorical sense that it was attached by a fierce doglike loyalty to the bar which was its home.
It had previously been more conventionally attached to the original owner of the bar, who on his deathbed had unexpectedly bequeathed it to medical science.
Medical science had decided they didn't like the look of it and had bequeathed it right back to the Old Pink Dog Bar.
The new barman didn't believe in the supernatural or poltergeists or anything kooky like that, he just knew an useful ally when he saw one.
The hand sat on the bar.
It took orders, it served drinks, it dealt murderously with people who behaved as if they wanted to be murdered.
Ford Prefect sat still.
Fie seemed a little taken aback.
Ford wondered briefly whether to raise the fact that he didn't have any other means of payment on him, but decided for the moment to soldier on.
The disembodied hand was now grasping his shoulder lightly but firmly between its finger and thumb.
It is the finest way of settling bills known to man.
The cheery quality of Ford's voice was beginning to grate on the barman's ears.
It sounded like someone relentlessly playing the kazoo during one of the more sombre passages of a War Requiem.
One of the bones in Ford's shoulder began to grate against another one of the bones in his shoulder in a way which suggested that the hand had learnt the principles of pain from a highly skilled chiropracter.
Fie hoped he could get this business settled before the hand started to grate one of the bones in his shoulder against any of the bones in different parts of his body.
Luckily, the shoulder it was holding was not the one he had his satchel slung over.
The barman slid the card back across the bar at Ford.
This was hardly surprising.
Exactly how serious, the American Express Company had got to know very rapidly, and the increasingly strident and panic- stricken demands of its debt collection department were only silenced by the unexpected demolition of the entire planet by the Vogons to make way for a new hyperspace bypass.
Fie had kept it ever since because he found it useful to carry a form of currency that no one would accept.
These two words were usually coupled together in the Old Pink Dog Bar.
Fie glanced around at the motley collection of thugs, pimps and record company executives that skulked on the edges of the dim pools of light with which the dark shadows of the bar's inner recesses were pitted.
They were all very deliberately looking in any direction but his now, carefully picking up the threads of their former conversations about murders, drug rings and music publishing deals.
They knew what would happen now and didn't want to watch in case it put them off their drinks.
It was felt that the story would get about of its own accord, and it had.
He picked it up and studied it thoughtfully under the malevolent gaze of the barman, and the equally malevolent gaze of the bird, which was currently gouging great furrows in the bar top with its talons.
It was a rather lengthy piece of paper.
At the bottom of it was a number which looked like one of those serial numbers you find on the underside of stereo sets which always takes so long to copy on to the registration form.
He had, after all, been in the bar all day, he had been drinking a lot of stuff with bubbles in it, and he had bought an awful lot of rounds for all the pimps, thugs and record executives who suddenly couldn't remember who he was.
He cleared his throat rather quietly and patted his pockets.
There was, as he knew, nothing in them.
He rested his left hand lightly but firmly on the half-opened flap of his satchel.
The disembodied hand renewed its pressure on his right shoulder.
This is it, thought Ford.
There was nothing else for it.
He had obeyed the rules, he had made a bona fide attempt to pay his bill, it had been rejected.
He was now in danger of his life.
With a sudden flash of speed he opened his satchel and slapped down on the bar top his copy of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and the official card which said that he was a field researcher for the Guide and absolutely not allowed to do what he was now doing.
The barman's face stopped in mid-wobble.
The bird's talons stopped in mid-furrow.
The hand slowly released its grip.
Chapter 5 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is a powerful organ.
Indeed, its influence is so prodigious that strict rules have had to be drawn up by its editorial staff to prevent its misuse.
Since invoking the third rule always involved giving the editor a cut.
Ford always preferred to much about with the first two.
He stepped out along the street, walking briskly.
The air was stifling, but he liked it because it was stifling city air, full of excitingly unpleasant smells, dangerous music and the sound of warring police tribes.
He carried his satchel with an easy swaying motion so that he could get a good swing at anybody who tried to take it from him without asking.
It contained everything he owned, which at the moment wasn't much.
A limousine careered down the street, dodging between the piles of burning garbage, and frightening an old pack animal which lurched, screeching, out of its way, stumbled against the window of a herbal remedies shop, set off a wailing alarm, blundered off down the street, and then pretended to fall down the steps of a small pasta restaurant where it knew it would get photographed and fed.
Ford was walking north.
He thought he was probably on his way to the spaceport, but he had thought that before.
He knew he was going through that part of the city where people's plans often changed quite abruptly.
This made Ford laugh.
Fie turned and opened his arms in a wide gesture.
Maybe you'll get rich.
Gunfire erupted from a window high above them, but it was only a bass player getting shot for playing the wrong riff three times in a row, and bass players are two a penny in Flan Dold City.
Ford stopped and peered into the dark doorway.
The girl laughed and stepped forward a little out of the shadow.
She was tall, and had that kind of self-possessed shyness which is a great trick if you can do it.
People love it.
She shrugged and took the proffered bottle.
They sat for a while, peacefully listening to the clamour of burglar alarms in the next block.
A huge electronic drum kit hurtled through the window high above them and smashed itself to bits in the street in front of them.
It soon became apparent that some of the burglar alarms on the next block had been deliberately set off by one police tribe in order to lay an ambush for the other.
Cars with screaming sirens converged on the area, only to find themselves being picked off by copters which came thudding through the air between the city's mountainous tower blocks.
Fie took his copy of the Guide back out of his satchel.
The new revisions are due to be released tonight over the net.
Someone must have found out that the planet I spent fifteen years on has been demolished by now.
She shrugged and pointed upwards.
There was a copter above them now which seemed to be involved in a side skirmish with the band upstairs.
Smoke was billowing from the building.
The sound engineer was hanging out of the window by his fingertips, and a maddened guitarist was beating on his fingers with a burning guitar.
The helicopter was firing at all of them.
They wandered down the street, away from the noise.
They ran into a street theatre group which tried to do a short play for them about the problems of the inner city, but then gave up and disappeared into the small restaurant most recently patronized by the pack animal.
All the time, Ford was poking at the interface panel of the Guide.
They ducked into an alleyway.
Ford squatted on a garbage can while information began to flood over the screen of the Guide.
Fie located his entry.
Almost immediately the screen became a mass of system messages.
This entry is being revised.
At the end of the alley a steel grey limousine crawled past.
I'm a working girl, and there are people over there who need me.
She brushed aside Ford's half-articulated protests, and left him sitting dejectedly on his garbage can preparing to watch a large swathe of his working life being swept away electronically into the ether.
Out in the street things had calmed down a little.
The police battle had moved off to other sectors of the city, the few surviving members of the rock band had agreed to recognize their musical differences and pursue solo careers, the street theatre group were re-emerging from the pasta restaurant with the pack animal, telling it they would take it to a bar they knew where it would be treated with a little respect, and a little way further on the steel grey limousine was parked silently by the kerbside.
The girl hurried towards it.
Behind her, in the darkness of the alley, a green flickering glow was bathing Ford Prefect's face, and his eyes were slowly widening in astonishment.
For where he had expected to find nothing, an erased, closed-off entry, there was instead a continuous stream of data-text, diagrams, figures and images, moving descriptions of surf on Australian beaches, Yoghurt on Greek islands, restaurants to avoid in Los Angeles, currency deals to avoid in Istanbul, weather to avoid in London, bars to go everywhere.
Pages and pages of it.
It was all there, everything he had written.
With a deepening frown of blank incomprehension he went backwards and forwards through it, stopping here and there at various entries.
Tips for aliens in New York: Land anywhere, Central Park, anywhere.
No one will care, or indeed even notice.
Surviving: get a job as cab driver immediately.
A cab driver's job is to drive people anywhere they want to go in big yellow machines called taxis.
Don't worry if you don't know how the machine works and you can't speak the language, don't understand the geography or indeed the basic physics of the area, and have large green antennae growing out of your head.
Believe me, this is the best way of staying inconspicuous.
If your body is really weird try showing it to people in the streets for money.
Amphibious life forms from any of the worlds in the Swulling, Noxios or Nausalia systems will particularly enjoy the East River, which is said to be richer in those lovely life-giving nutrients then the finest and most virulent laboratory slime yet achieved.
Having fun: This is the big section.
It is impossible to have more fun without electrocuting your pleasure centres...
And then at last, five seconds after the moment he had determined as being the last possible moment had already passed, the gently swinging nausea of dematerialization as he and Arthur Dent had been beamed up through the atmosphere like a sports broadcast.
There was no mistake, there couldn't have been.
The Earth had definitely been destroyed.
Definitely, definitely.
Boiled away into space.
And yet here - he activated the Guide again - was his own entry on how you would set about having a good time in Bournemouth, Dorset, England, which he had always prided himself on as being one of the most baroque pieces of invention he had ever delivered.
He read it again and shook his head in sheer wonder.
Suddenly he realized what the answer to the problem was, and it was this, that something very weird was happening; and if something very weird was happening, he thought, he wanted it to be happening to him.
He stashed the Guide back in his satchel and hurried out on to the street again.
Ford grinned, detoured round the next block which was now in flames, found a police helicopter which was standing unattended in the street, broke into it, strapped himself in, crossed his fingers and sent it hurtling inexpertly into the sky.
He weaved terrifyingly up through the canyoned walls of the city, and once clear of them, hurtled through the black and red pall of smoke which hung permanently above it.
Ten minutes later, with all the copter's sirens blaring and its rapid- fire cannon blasting at random into the clouds, Ford Prefect brought it careering down among the gantries and landing lights at Han Dold spaceport, where it settled like a gigantic, startled and very noisy gnat.
Since he hadn't damaged it too much he was able to trade it in for a first class ticket on the next ship leaving the system, and settled into one of its huge, voluptuous body-hugging seats.
This was going to be fun, he thought to himself, as the ship blinked silently across the insane distances of deep space and the cabin service got into its full extravagant swing.
He smiled with a curious kind of manic joy as he flipped again through the mysteriously re-instated entry on the planet Earth.
He had a major piece of unfinished business that he would now be able to attend to, and was terribly pleased that life had suddenly furnished him with a serious goal to achieve.
It suddenly occurred to him to wonder where Arthur Dent was, and if he knew.
Arthur Dent was one thousand, four hundred and thirty-seven light years away in a Saab, and anxious.
Behind him in the backseat was a girl who had made him crack his head on the door as he climbed in.
He didn't know if it was just because she was the first female of his own species that he had laid eyes on in years, or what it was, but he felt stupefied with, with...
This is absurd, he told himself.
Calm down, he told himself.
You are not, he continued to himself in the firmest internal voice he could muster, in a fit and rational state.
You have just hitch-hiked over a hundred thousand light years across the galaxy, you are very tired, a little confused and extremely vulnerable.
Relax, don't panic, concentrate on breathing deeply.
He twisted round in his seat.
Beyond the fact that she was, to him, heartthumpingly beautiful, he could make out very little, how tall she was, how old she was, the exact shading of her hair.
And nor could he ask her anything about herself because, sadly, she was completely unconscious.
The conversation so far had been going astoundingly badly.
After an initial flurry of opening hellos, he and Russell - the wonderful girl's brother's name was Russell, a name which, to Arthur's mind, always suggested burly men with blond moustaches and blow-dried hair, who would at the slightest provocation start wearing velvet tuxedos and frilly shirtfronts and would then have to be forcibly restrained from commentating on snooker matches - had quickly discovered they didn't like each other at all.
Russell was a burly man.
He had a blond moustache.
His hair was fine and blow dried.
To be fair to him - though Arthur didn't see any necessity for this beyond the sheer mental exercise of it - he, Arthur, was looking pretty grim himself.
A man can't cross a hundred thousand light years, mostly in other people's baggage compartments, without beginning to fray a little, and Arthur had frayed a lot.
She seemed to stir slightly and her head slipped sideways on her shoulder.
Her dark hair fell across her face, obscuring it.
I'm taking her back to the hospital and telling them to have another go.
Russell hooted his horn fiercely at the car that came round the corner towards them half-way on to their side of the road, making them swerve.
The anger seemed to make him feel better.
At least medical science could deal with it, that's the point.
Take your pick, I said.
Anything in here can be dealt with.
The proper drugs can be prescribed.
But no, she has to have something different.
Just to make life difficult.
Fie was rather disappointed to discover her name was Fenny.
It was a rather silly, dispiriting name, such as an unlovely maiden aunt might vote herself if she couldn't sustain the name Fenella properly.
Fie slowed down.
It was in fact Arthur's turning, but he couldn't leave without finding out something more about this girl who seemed to have taken such a grip on his mind without even waking up.
Fie could take either of the next two turnings.
They led back to the village that had been his home, though what he would find there he hesitated to imagine.
Familiar landmarks had been flitting by, ghostlike, in the dark, giving rise to the shudders that only very normal things can create, when seen where the mind is unprepared for them, and in an unfamiliar light.
By his own personal time scale, so far as he could estimate it, living as he had been under the alien rotations of distant suns, it was eight years since he had left, but what time had passed here he could hardly guess.
Indeed, what events had passed were beyond his exhausted comprehension because this planet, his home, should not be here.
Eight years ago, at lunchtime, this planet had been demolished, utterly destroyed, by the huge yellow Vogon ships which had hung in the lunchtime sky as if the law of gravity was no more than a local regulation, and breaking it no more than a parking offence.
It's no good telling her that she is living in the real world because she just says that's why the delusions are so strange.
Don't know about you, but I find that kind of conversation pretty exhausting.
Give her the tablets and piss off for a beer is my answer.
Arthur frowned, not for the first time.
Arthur whirled round in his seat and stared into her suddenly open but utterly vacant eyes.
Whatever she was looking at wasn't in the car.
Her eyes fluttered, her head jerked once, and then she was sleeping peacefully.
How the heck should I know?
This hedgehog, that chimney pot, the other pair of Don Alfonso's tweezers.
Arthur tried to say it as matter-of-factly as possible but it didn't seem to work.
It's none of my business.
You'll have to excuse me.
He stared furiously out of the window.
Perhaps you'd better let me out.
At the moment he said it, it became impossible, because the storm which had passed them by suddenly erupted again.
Lightning belted through the sky, and someone seemed to be pouring something which closely resembled the Atlantic Ocean over them through a sieve.
Russell swore and steered intently for a few seconds as the sky blattered at them.
Arthur wondered for a moment whether to mention again that he had just hitch-hiked back from the other side of the Horsehead Nebula and was for this and various other related and astounding reasons a little out of touch with recent events, but he decided it would only confuse matters further.
She was in a cafe somewhere.
Rickmansworth.
Don't know what she was doing there, but that was where she cracked up.
Arthur winced.
Russell made a sort of grumping noise.
The hallucinations.
Everyone said it was a cock up, the CIA trying experiments into drug warfare or something.
I'm talking about all that stuff with the big yellow ships, everyone going crazy and saying we're going to die, and then pop, they vanished as the effect wore off.
Arthur's head went a little swimmy.
His hand grabbed at something to steady himself, and gripped it tightly.
His mouth made little opening and closing movements as if it was on his mind to say something, but nothing emerged.
He shrugged.
This was, to Arthur, such an astonishingly good question that he half-leapt out of his seat with shock.
He pulled it out of the path of an oncoming lorry and swerved up on to a grass bank.
As the car lurched to a halt. the girl in the back was thrown against Russell's seat and collapsed awkwardly.
Arthur twisted round in horror.
Russell swept his hands angrily back through his blow-dried hair.
He tugged at his blond moustache.
He turned to Arthur.
Chapter 6 From here it was a four-mile walk to his village: a further mile to the turning, to which the abominable Russell had now fiercely declined to take him, and from there a further three miles of winding country lane.
The Saab seethed off into the night.
Arthur watched it go, as stunned as a man might be who, having believed himself to be totally blind for five years, suddenly discovers that he had merely been wearing too large a hat.
He shook his head sharply in the hope that it might dislodge some salient fact which would fall into place and make sense of an otherwise utterly bewildering Universe, but since the salient fact, if there was one, entirely failed to do this, he set off up the road again, hoping that a good vigorous walk, and maybe even some good painful blisters, would help to reassure him of his own existence at least, if not his sanity.
It was 10.30 when he arrived, a fact he discovered from the steamed and greasy window of the Horse and Groom pub, in which there had hung for many years a battered old Guiness clock which featured a picture of an emu with a pint glass jammed rather amusingly down its throat.
This was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime during which first his house and then the entire planet Earth had been demolished, or rather had seemed to be demolished.
No, damn it, had been demolished, because if it hadn't then where the bloody heck had he been for the last eight years, and how he had got there if not in one of the big yellow Vogon ships which the appalling Russell had just been telling him were merely drug-induced hallucinations, and yet if it had been demolished, what was he currently standing on...?
He jammed the brake on this line of thought because it wasn't going to get him any further than it had the last twenty times he'd been over it.
He started again.
This was the pub at which he had passed the fateful lunchtime during which whatever it was had happened that he was going to sort out later had happened, and...
It still didn't make sense.
He started again.
This was the pub in which...
This was a pub.
Pubs served drinks and he couldn't half do with one.
Satisfied that his jumbled thought processes had at last arrived at a conclusion, and a conclusion he was happy with, even if it wasn't the one he had set out to achieve, he strode towards the door.
And stopped.
A small black wire-haired terrier ran out from behind a low wall and then, catching sight of Arthur, began to snarl.
Now Arthur knew this dog, and he knew it well.
It belonged to an advertising friend of his, and was called Know-Nothing-Bozo because the way its hair stood up on its head it reminded people of the President of the United States, and the dog knew Arthur, or at least should do.
It was a stupid dog, could not even read an autocue, which way why some people had protested about its name, but it should at least have been able to recognize Arthur instead of standing there, hackles raised, as if Arthur was the most fearful apparition ever to intrude upon its feeble-witted life.
This prompted Arthur to go and peer at the window again, this time with an eye not for the asphyxiating emu but for himself.
Seeing himself for the first time suddenly in a familiar context, he had to admit that the dog had a point.
He looked a lot like something a farmer would use to scare birds with, and there was no doubt but that to go into the pub in his present condition would excite comments of a raucous kind, and worse still, there would doubtless be several people in there at the moment whom he knew, all of whom would be bound to bombard him with questions which, at the moment, he felt ill-equipped to deal with.
Will Smithers, for instance, the owner of Know-Nothing-Bozo the Non-Wonder Dog, an animal so stupid that it had been sacked from one of Will's own commercials for being incapable of knowing which dog food it was supposed to prefer, despite the fact that the meat in all the other bowls had had engine oil poured over it.
Will would definitely be in there.
Damn him.
He stared at it and realized that he had just learned something he hadn't known before.
Will Smithers, like most of the overpaid and under-scrupulous bastards Arthur knew in advertising made a point of changing his car every August so that he could tell people his accountant made him do it, though the truth was that his accountant was trying like hell to stop him, what with all the alimony he had to pay, and so on - and this was the same car Arthur remembered him having before.
The number plate proclaimed its year.
Given that it was now winter, and that the event which had caused Arthur so much trouble eight of his personal years ago had occurred at the beginning of September, less than six or seven months could have passed here.
He stood terribly still for a moment and let Know-Nothing-Bozo jump up and down yapping at him.
He was suddenly stunned by a realization he could no longer avoid, which was this: he was now an alien on his own world.
Try as he might, no one was even to be able to believe his story.
Not only did it sound perfectly potty, but it was flatly contradicted by the simplest observable facts.
Was this really the Earth?
Was there the slightest possibility that he had made some extraordinary mistake?
The pub in front of him was unbearably familiar to him in every detail - every brick, every piece of peeling paint; and inside he could sense its familiar stuffy, noisy warmth, its exposed beams, its unauthentic cast-iron light fittings, its bar sticky with beer that people he knew had put their elbows in, overlooked by cardboard cutouts of girls with packets of peanuts stapled all over their breasts.
It was all the stuff of his home, his world.
He even knew this blasted dog.
If he stood his ground he would be discovered and the whole circus would begin.
To hide would only postpone the moment, and it was bitterly cold now.
The fact that it was Will made the choice easier.
It wasn't that Arthur disliked him as such-Will was quite fun.
It was just that he was fun in such an exhausting way because, being in advertising, he always wanted you to know how much fun he was having and where he had got his jacket from.
Mindful of this, Arthur hid behind a van.
The door opened and Will came out, wearing a leather flying jacket that he'd got a mate of his at the Road Research Laboratory to crash a car into specially, in order to get that battered look.
Know-Nothing yelped with delight and, having got the attention it wanted, was happy to forget Arthur.
Will was with some friends, and they had a game they played with the dog.
They all laughed and cheered it on, then gradually dispersed to their various cars and disappeared into the night.
Well that clears one thing up, thought Arthur from behind the van, this is quite definitely the planet I remember.
Chapter 7 His house was still there.
How or why, he had no idea.
He had decided to go and have a look while he was waiting for the pub to empty, so that he could go and ask the landlord for a bed for the night when everyone else had gone.
And there it was.
He hurriedly let himself in with the key he kept under a stone frog in the garden, because, astoundingly, the phone was ringing.
He had heard it faintly all the way up the lane and had started to run as soon as he realized where the sound was coming from.
The door had to be forced open because of the astonishing accumulation of junk mail on the doormat.
It jammed itself stuck on what he would later discover were fourteen identical, personally addressed invitations to apply for a credit card he already had, seventeen identical threatening letters for non-payment of bills on a credit card he didn't have, thirty-three identical letters saying that he personally had been specially selected as a man of taste and discrimination who knew what he wanted and where he was going in today's sophisticated jet-setting world and would he therefore like to buy some grotty wallet, and also a dead tabby kitten.
He rammed himself through the relatively narrow opening afforded by all this, stumbled through a pile of wine offers that no discriminating connoisseur would want to miss, slithered over a heap of beach villa holidays, blundered up the dark stairs to his bedroom and got to the phone just as it stopped ringing.
He collapsed, panting, on to his cold, musty-smelling bed and for a few minutes stopped trying to prevent the world from spinning round his head in the way it obviously wanted to.
When it had enjoyed its little spin and had calmed down a bit, Arthur reached out for the bedside light, not expecting it to come on.
To his surprise it did.
This appealed to Arthur's sense of logic.
Since the Electricity Board cut him off without fail every time he paid his bill. it seemed only reasonable that they should leave him connected when he didn't.
Sending them money obviously only drew attention to yourself.
The room was much as he had left it, i.e. festeringly untidy, though the effect was muted a little by a thick layer of dust.
Half-read books and magazines nestled amongst piles of half-used towels.
Half pairs of socks reclined in half-drunk cups of coffee.
What was once a half- eaten sandwich had now half-turned into something that Arthur entirely didn't want to know about.
Bung a fork of lightning through this lot, he thought to himself, and you'd start the evolution of life all over again.
There was only one thing in the room that was different.
For a moment or so he couldn't see what the one thing that was different was, because it too was covered in a film of disgusting dust.
Then his eyes caught it and stopped.
It was next to a battered old television on which it was only possible to watch Open University Study Courses, because if it tried to show anything more exciting it would break down.
It was a box.
Arthur pushed himself up on his elbows and peered at it.
It was a grey box, with a kind of dull lustre to it.
It was a cubic grey box, just over a foot on a side.
It was tied with a single grey ribbon, knotted into a neat bow on the top.
He got up, walked over and touched it in surprise.
Whatever it was clearly gift-wrapped, neatly and beautifully, and was waiting for him to open it.
Cautiously, he picked it up and carried it back to the bed.
He brushed the dust off the top and loosened the ribbon.
The top of the box was a lid, with a flap tucked into the body of the box.
He untucked it and looked into the box.
In it was a glass globe, nestling in fine grey tissue paper.
He drew it out, carefully.
It wasn't a proper globe because it was open at the bottom, or, as Arthur realized turning it over, at the top, with a thick rim.
It was a bowl.
A fish bowl.
It was made of the most wonderful glass perfectly transparent, yet with an extraordinary silver-grey quality as if crystal and slate had gone into its making.
Arthur slowly turned it over and over in his hands.
It was one of the most beautiful objects he had ever seen, but he was entirely perplexed by it.
He looked into the box, but other than the tissue paper there was nothing.
On the outside of the box there was nothing.
He turned the bowl round again.
It was wonderful.
It was exquisite.
But it was a fish bowl.
He tapped it with his thumbnail and it rang with a deep and glorious chime which was sustained for longer than seemed possible, and when at last it faded seemed not to die away but to drift off into other worlds, as into a deep sea dream.
Entranced, Arthur turned it round yet again, and this time the light from the dusty little bedside lamp caught it at a different angle and glittered on some fine abrasions on the fish bowl's surface.
He held it up, adjusting the angle to the light, and suddenly saw clearly the finely engraved shapes of words shadowed on the glass.
And that was all.
He blinked, and understood nothing.
For fully five more minutes he turned the object round and around, held it to the light at different angles, tapped it for its mesmerizing chime and pondered on the meaning of the shadowy letters but could find none.
Finally he stood up, filled the bowl with water from the tap and put it back on the table next to the television.
He shook the little Babel fish from his ear and dropped it, wriggling, into the bowl.
He wouldn't be needing it any more, except for watching foreign movies.
He returned to lie on his bed, and turned out the light.
He lay still and quiet.
He absorbed the enveloping darkness, slowly relaxed his limbs from end to end, eased and regulated his breathing, gradually cleared his mind of all thought, closed his eyes and was completely incapable of getting to sleep.
The night was uneasy with rain.
The rain clouds themselves had now moved on and were currently concentrating their attention on a small transport cafe just outside Bournemouth, but the sky through which they had passed had been disturbed by them and now wore a damply ruffled air, as if it didn't know what else it might not do it further provoked.
The moon was out in a watery way.
It looked like a ball of paper from the back pocket of jeans that have just come out of the washing machine, and which only time and ironing would tell if it was an old shopping list or a five pound note.
The wind flicked about a little, like the tail of a horse that's trying to decide what sort of mood it's in tonight, and a bell somewhere chimed midnight.
A skylight creaked open.
It was stiff and had to be jiggled and persuaded a little because the frame was slightly rotten and the hinges had at some time in its life been rather sensibly painted over, but eventually it was open.
A strut was found to prop it and a figure struggled out into the narrow gully between the opposing pitches of the roof.
It stood and watched the sky in silence.
The figure was completely unrecognizable as the wild-looking creature who had burst crazily into the cottage a little over an hour ago.
Gone was the ragged threadbare dressing gown, smeared with the mud of a hundred worlds, stained with junk food condiment from a hundred grimy spaceports, gone was the tangled mane of hair, gone the long and knotted beard, flourishing ecosystem and all.
Instead, there was Arthur Dent the smooth and casual, in corduroys and a chunky sweater.
His hair was cropped and washed, his chin clean shaven.
Only the eyes still said that whatever it was the Universe thought it was doing to him, he would still like it please to stop.
They were not the same eyes with which he had last looked out at this particular scene, and the brain which interpreted the images the eyes resolved was not the same brain.
There had been no surgery involved, just the continual wrenching of experience.
The night seemed like an alive thing to him at this moment, the dark earth around him a being in which he was rooted.
He could feel like a tingle on distant nerve ends the flood of a far river, the roll of invisible hills, the knot of heavy rainclouds parked somewhere away to the south.
He could sense, too, the thrill of being a tree, which was something he hadn't expected.
He knew that it felt good to curl your toes in the earth, but he'd never realized it could feel quite as good as that.
He could sense an almost unseemly wave of pleasure reaching out to him all the way from the New Forest.
He must try this summer, he thought, and see what having leaves felt like.
From another direction he felt the sensation of being a sheep startled by a flying saucer, but it was virtually indistinguishable from the feeling of being a sheep startled by anything else it ever encountered, for they were creatures who learned very little on their journey through life, and would be startled to see the sun rising in the morning, and astonished by all the green stuff in the fields.
He was surprised to find he could feel the sheep being startled by the sun that morning, and the morning before, and being startled by a clump of trees the day before that.
He could go further and further back, but it got dull because all it consisted of was sheep being startled by things they'd been startled by the day before.
He left the sheep and let his mind drift outwards sleepily in developing ripples.
It felt the presence of other minds, hundreds of them, thousands in a web, some sleepy, some sleeping, some terribly excited, one fractured.
One fractured.
He passed it fleetingly and tried to feel for it again, but it eluded him like the other card with an apple on it in Pelmanism.
He felt a spasm of excitement because he knew instinctively who it was, or at least knew who it was he wanted it to be, and once you know what it is you want to be true, instinct is a very useful device for enabling you to know that it is.
He instinctively knew that it was Fenny and that he wanted to find her; but he could not.
By straining too much for it, he could feel he was losing this strange new faculty, so he relaxed the search and let his mind wander more easily once more.
And again, he felt the fracture.
Again he couldn't find it.
This time, whatever his instinct was busy telling him it was all right to believe, he wasn't certain that it was Fenny - or perhaps it was a different fracture this time.
It had the same disjointed quality but it seemed a more general feeling of fracture, deeper, not a single mind, maybe not a mind at all.
It was different.
He let his mind sink slowly and widely into the Earth, rippling, seeping, sinking.
He was following the Earth through its days, drifting with the rhythms of its myriad pulses, seeping through the webs of its life, swelling with its tides, turning with its weight.
Always the fracture kept returning, a dull disjointed distant ache.
And now he was flying through a land of light; the light was time, the tides of it were days receding.
The fracture he had sensed, the second fracture, lay in the distance before him across the land, the thickness of a single hair across the dreaming landscape of the days of Earth.
And suddenly he was upon it.
He danced dizzily over the edge as the dreamland dropped sheer away beneath him, a stupefying precipice into nothing, him wildly twisting, clawing at nothing, flailing in horrifying space, spinning, falling.
Across the jagged chasm had been another land, another time, an older world, not fractured from, but hardly joined: two Earths.
He woke.
A cold breeze brushed the feverish sweat standing on his forehead.
The nightmare was spent and so, he felt, was he.
His shoulders dropped, he gently rubbed his eyes with the tips of his fingers.
At last he was sleepy as well as very tired.
As to what it meant, if it meant anything at all, he would think about it in the morning; for now he would go to bed and sleep.
His own bed, his own sleep.
He could see his house in the distance and wondered why this was.
It was silhouetted against the moonlight and he recognized its rather dull blockish shape.
He looked about him and noticed that he was about eighteen inches above the rose bushes of one of his neighbours, John Ainsworth.
His rose bushes were carefully tended, pruned back for the winter, strapped to canes and labelled, and Arthur wondered what he was doing above them.
He wondered what was holding him there, and when he discovered that nothing was holding him there he crashed awkwardly to the ground.
He picked himself up, brushed himself down and hobbled back to his house on a sprained ankle.
He undressed and toppled into bed.
While he was asleep the phone rang again.
It rang for fully fifteen minutes and caused him to turn over twice.
It never, however, stood a chance of waking him up.
Chapter 8 Arthur awoke feeling wonderful, absolutely fabulous, refreshed, overjoyed to be home, bouncing with energy, hardly disappointed at all to discover it was the middle of February.
He almost danced to the fridge, found the three least hairy things in it, put them on a plate and watched them intently for two minutes.
Since they made no attempt to move within that time he called them breakfast and ate them.
Between them they killed a virulent space disease he's picked up without knowing it in the Flargathon Gas Swamps a few days earlier, which otherwise would have killed off half the population of the Western Hemisphere, blinded the other half and driven everyone else psychotic and sterile, so the Earth was lucky there.
He felt strong, he felt healthy.
He vigorously cleared away the junk mail with a spade and then buried the cat.
Just as he was finishing that, the phone went, but he let it ring while he maintained a moment's respectful silence.
Whoever it was would ring back if it was important.
He kicked the mud off his shoes and went back inside.
There had been a small number of significant letters in the piles of junk - some documents from the council, dated three years earlier, relating to the proposed demolition of his house, and some other letters about the setting up of a public inquiry into the whole bypass scheme in the area; there was also an old letter from Greenpeace, the ecological pressure group to which he occasionally made contributions, asking for help with their scheme to release dolphins and orcas from captivity, and some postcards from friends, vaguely complaining that he never got in touch these days.
He unpacked his towel and another few odd bits and pieces from the plastic bag he had acquired at the Port Brasta Mega-Market.
The slogan on the side was a clever and elaborate pun in Lingua Centauri which was completely incomprehensible in any other language and therefore entirely pointless for a Duty Free Shop at a spaceport.
The bag also had a hole in it so he threw it away.
He realized with a sudden twinge that something else must have dropped out in the small spacecraft that had brought him to Earth, kindly going out of its way to drop him right beside the A303.
He had lost his battered and spaceworn copy of the thing which had helped him find his way across the unbelievable wastes of space he had traversed.
He had lost the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
Well, he told himself, this time I really won't be needing it again.
He had some calls to make.
He had decided how to deal with the mass of contradictions his return journey precipitated, which was that he would simply brazen it out.
He phoned the BBC and asked to be put through to his department head.
Thought it was probably something like that.
Happens here all the time.
He flipped through the Yellow Pages and made a short list of numbers to try.
Yes, I was just phoning to see if I could have a word with Fenella, er...
Fenella - Good Lord, silly me, I'll forget my own name next, er, Fenella - isn't this ridiculous?
Click.
Six conversations along these lines began to take their toll on his mood of vigorous, dynamic optimism, and he decided that before it deserted him entirely he would take it down to the pub and parade it a little.
Fie had had the perfect idea for explaining away every inexplicable weirdness about himself at a stroke, and he whistled to himself as he pushed open the door which had so daunted him last night.
Chapter 9 He accepted another pint and took a pull at it.
He was getting silly and he knew it.
Exuberance and Hall and Woodhouse best bitter was a mixture to be wary of, but one of the first effects it had is to stop you being wary of things, and the point at which Arthur should have stopped and explained no more was the point at which he started instead to get inventive.
He smiled again.
He paused thoughtfully to let a little grammar assemble in his head.
They couldn't get it to work you know.
Nostradamus and that lot.
He took another pull at his beer.
It was something he had not tasted for eight years.
He tasted it and tasted it.
He paused.
The things you mentioned.
He paused and manoeuvred his thoughts.
It was like watching oil tankers doing three-point turns in the English Channel.
He rounded on the doubting part of his audience, which was all of it, and so it took a little while to round on it completely.
Three members of his audience said they had and that he was talking nonsense.
In a trance.
I was in a tank.
He waited patiently while the next round was duly distributed.
He composed the next bit of his story in his mind, which was going to be something about the tank needing to be orientated along a line dropped perpendicularly from the Pole Star to a baseline drawn between Mars and Venus, and was about to start trying to say it when he decided to give it a miss.
He looked round severely at his audience, to make sure it was all following attentively.
He resumed.
Getting out of the tank is hell.
He looked swayingly around at his audience, and could not help but be aware of an air of scepticism about their jumbled faces.
He felt very affronted by this.
Friendly arms began to help him home.
You've got to look as if you've seen the Galaxy.
Life, I mean.
You've got to look as if you've seen life.
That's what I got.
A face drop.
Give me eight years, I said.
He lapsed into silence for a while as the friendly arms continued to help him along the lane to his house.
After a little sleep Arthur got up and pottered round the house a bit.
He felt woozy and a little low, still disoriented by the journey.
He wondered how he was going to find Fenny.
He sat and looked at the fish bowl.
He tapped it again, and despite being full of water and a small yellow Babel fish which was gulping its way around rather dejectedly, it still chimed its deep and resonant chime as clearly and mesmerically as before.
Someone is trying to thank me, he thought to himself.
He wondered who, and for what.
Ford Prefect suppressed a little giggle of evil satisfaction, realized that he had no reason to suppress it, and laughed out loud, a wicked laugh.
He switched the incoming signal through from the Sub-Etha Net to the ship's hi-fi system, and the odd, rather stilted, sing-song voice spoke out with remarkable clarity round the cabin.
He tweaked the volume up just a little while keeping a careful eye on a rapidly changing table of figures on the ship's computer display.
For the length of time he had in mind, the question of power consumption became significant.
He didn't want a murder on his conscience.
He checked around the small ship.
He walked down the short corridor.
He stuck his head into the small, functional, gleaming steel bathroom.
It sounded fine in there.
He looked into the tiny sleeping quarters.
It sounded a bit muffled.
There was a towel hanging over one of the speakers.
He took down the towel.
Fine.
He checked out the packed cargo hold, and wasn't at all satisfied with the sound.
There was altogether too much crated junk in the way.
He stepped back out and waited for the door to seal.
He broke open a closed control panel and pushed the jettison button.
He didn't know why he hadn't thought of that before.
A whooshing rumbling noise died away quickly into silence.
After a pause a slight hiss could be heard again.
It stopped.
He waited for the green light to show and then opened the door again on the now empty cargo hold.
Very nice.
He then went and had a last thorough examination of the emergency suspended animation chamber, which was where he particularly wanted it to be heard.
He shivered as he peered down through the heavily frosted covering at the dim bulk of the form within.
One day, who knew when, it would wake, and when it did, it would know what time it was.
Not exactly local time, true, but what the heck.
He double-checked the computer display above the freezer bed, dimmed the lights and checked it again.
He tiptoed out and returned to the control cabin.
The voice sounded as clear as if he was hearing it over a phone in London, which he wasn't, not by a long way.
He gazed out into the inky night.
The star the size of a brilliant biscuit crumb he could see in the distance was Zondostina, or as it was known on the world from which the rather stilted, sing-song voice was being received, Pleiades Zeta.
The bright orange curve that filled over half the visible area was the giant gas planet Sesefras Magna, where the Xaxisian battleships docked, and just rising over its horizon was a small cool blue moon, Epun.
For twenty minutes he sat and watched as the gap between the ship and Epun closed, as the ship's computer teased and kneaded the numbers that would bring it into a loop around the little moon, close the loop and keep it there, orbiting in perpetual obscurity.
His original plan had been to close down all external signalling and radiation from the ship, to render it as nearly invisible as possible unless you were actually looking at it, but then he'd had an idea he preferred.
It would now emit one single continuous beam, pencil-thin, broadcasting the incoming time signal to the planet of the signal's origin, which it would not reach for four hundred years, travelling at light speed, but where it would probably cause something of a stir when it did.
He sniggered.
He didn't like to think of himself as the sort of person who giggled or sniggered, but he had to admit that he had been giggling and sniggering almost continuously for well over half an hour now.
The ship was now locked almost perfectly into its perpetual orbit round a little known and never visited moon.
Almost perfect.
One thing only remained.
He ran again the computer simulation of the launching of the ship's little Escape-O-Buggy, balancing actions, reactions, tangential forces, all the mathematical poetry of motion, and saw that it was good.
Before he left, he turned out the lights.
As his tiny little cigar tube of an escape craft zipped out on the beginning of its three-day journey to the orbiting space station Port Sesefron, it rode for a few seconds a long pencil-thin beam of radiation that was starting out on a longer journey still.
He giggled and sniggered.
He would have laughed out loud but he didn't have the room.
However noncommittally Arthur grunted, the man seemed determined to talk to him.
He wondered if he should get up and move to another table, but there didn't seem to be one free in the whole cafeteria.
He stirred his coffee fiercely.
Arthur stared, frowning, out of the window.
A light, sunny spray of rain hung over the motorway.
Two months he'd been back now.
Slipping back into his old life had in fact been laughably easy.
People had such extraordinarily short memories, including him.
Eight years of crazed wanderings round the Galaxy now seemed to him not so much like a bad dream as like a film he had videotaped from the tv and now kept in the back of a cupboard without bothering to watch.
One effect that still lingered though, was his joy at being back.
Now that the Earth's atmosphere had closed over his head for good, he thought, wrongly, everything within it gave him extraordinary pleasure.
Looking at the silvery sparkle of the raindrops he felt he had to protest.
They're light and refreshing.
The man snorted derisively.
He was a lorry driver.
I hate driving in the rain.
Ironic isn't it?
If there was a sequitur hidden in this remark, Arthur had not been able to divine it and had merely given a little grunt, affable but not encouraging.
But the man had not been deterred then, and was not deterred now.
He leaned forward, screwing his face up as if he was going to say something about the government.
Arthur gave up.
He decided to leave his coffee, which was too hot to drink quickly and too nasty to drink cold.
He stopped off at the service station shop, then walked back through the car park, making a point of enjoying the fine play of rain on his face.
There was even, he noticed, a faint rainbow glistening over the Devon hills.
He enjoyed that too.
He climbed into his battered but adored old black Golf GTi, squealed the tyres, and headed out past the islands of petrol pumps and on to the slip road back towards the motorway.
He was wrong in thinking that the atmosphere of the Earth had closed finally and for ever above his head.
He was wrong to think that it would ever be possible to put behind him the tangled web of irresolutions into which his galactic travels had dragged him.
He was wrong to think he could now forget that the big, hard, oily, dirty, rainbow-hung Earth on which he lived was a microscopic dot on a microscopic dot lost in the unimaginable infinity of the Universe.
He drove on, humming, being wrong about all these things.
The reason he was wrong was standing by the slip road under a small umbrella.
His jaw sagged.
He sprained his ankle against the brake pedal and skidded so hard he very nearly turned the car over.
Having narrowly avoided hitting her with the actual car, he hit her instead with the car door as he leant across and flung it open at her.
It caught her hand and knocked away her umbrella, which then bowled wildly away across the road.
The lorry swept along the motorway and away.
The umbrella lay like a recently swatted daddy-long-legs, expiring sadly on the ground.
Tiny gusts of wind made it twitch a little.
He picked it up.
There didn't seem to be a lot of point in offering the thing back to her.
He looked at her and tailed off.
She was tallish with dark hair which fell in waves around a pale and serious face.
Standing still, alone, she seemed almost sombre, like a statue to some important but unpopular virtue in a formal garden.
She seemed to be looking at something other than what she looked as if she was looking at.
But when she smiled, as she did now, it was as if she suddenly arrived from somewhere.
Warmth and life flooded into her face, and impossibly graceful movement into her body.
The effect was very disconcerting, and it disconcerted Arthur like hell.
She grinned, tossed her bag into the back and swivelled herself into the front seat.
She laughed and pulled on her seatbelt.
He felt, as he let the car pull slowly away, that he could hardly think or breathe, and hoped that neither of these functions were vital to his driving or they were in trouble.
So what he had experienced in the other car, her brother's car, the night he had returned exhausted and bewildered from his nightmare years in the stars had not been the unbalance of the moment, or, if it had been, he was at least twice as unbalanced now, and quite liable to fall off whatever it is that well-balanced people are supposed to be balancing on.
I asked about buses but the man started to look at the calendar rather than a timetable, so I decided to hitch.
Very close, he hoped, or long away.
Close would mean she lived near him, a long way would mean he could drive her there.
If that's all right.
It's not far.
Taunton was wonderfully close to him.
He could...
It was the worst thing possible.
Taunton was only minutes away up the motorway.
Bungling idiot.
He was behaving like a twelve-year-old.
Bungling idiot.
And suddenly she was gone.
Or rather, that part of her which brought her to life was gone.
She looked rather distantly out of the window and hummed lightly to herself.
He couldn't believe it.
Thirty seconds into the conversation, and already he'd blown it.
Grown men, he told himself, in flat contradiction of centuries of accumulated evidence about the way grown men behave, do not behave like this.
Taunton 5 miles, said the signpost.
He gripped the steering wheel so tightly the car wobbled.
He was going to have to do something dramatic.
She glanced round sharply at him.
She was still looking at him, but said nothing.
Oh.
He was thrashing about.
He narrowly avoided careering into the side of a hundred Italian washing machines in a German lorry.
Chapter 12 There is, for some reason, something especially grim about pubs near stations, a very particular kind of grubbiness, a special kind of pallor to the pork pies.
Worse than the pork pies, though, are the sandwiches.
There is a feeling which persists in England that making a sandwich interesting, attractive, or in any way pleasant to eat is something sinful that only foreigners do.
It is by eating sandwiches in pubs on Saturday lunchtimes that the British seek to atone for whatever their national sins have been.
They're not altogether clear what those sins are, and don't want to know either.
Sins are not the sort of things one wants to know about.
But whatever their sins are they are amply atoned for by the sandwiches they make themselves eat.
If there is anything worse than the sandwiches, it is the sausages which sit next to them.
Joyless tubes, full of gristle, floating in a sea of something hot and sad, stuck with a plastic pin in the shape of a chef's hat: a memorial, one feels, for some chef who hated the world, and died, forgotten and alone among his cats on a back stair in Stepney.
The sausages are for the ones who know what their sins are and wish to atone for something specific.
They sat at a small wobbly table.
On it were some dirty glasses, and some soggy beermats with jokes printed on them.
Arthur got Fenny a tomato juice, and himself a pint of yellow water with gas in it.
And a couple of sausages.
Fie didn't know why.
Fie bought them for something to do while the gas settled in his glass.
The barman dunked Arthur's change in a pool of beer on the bar, for which Arthur thanked him.
She sounded, as well she might, extremely sceptical, and Arthur's heart sank.
Hardly, he felt, the most conductive setting to try to explain to her as she sat there, suddenly cool and defensive, that in a sort of out-of-body dream he had had a telepathic sense that the mental breakdown she had suffered had been connected with the fact that, appearances to the contrary nonwithstanding, the Earth had been demolished to make way for a new hyperspace bypass, something which he alone on Earth knew anything about, having virtually witnessed it from a Vogon spaceship, and that furthermore both his body and soul ached for her unbearably and he needed to got to bed with her as soon as was humanly possible.
He glanced up sharply.
He was being leant over by a rather stiffly slim middle-aged woman with a prim knitted suit and a prim little perm, and a prim little smile that probably got licked by prim little dogs a lot.
She was holding out a small book of cloakroom tickets and a collecting tin.
She gave a tinkly little laugh and then a curiously long sigh.
With infuriating slowness, and prim theatricality, if there was such a thing, the woman tore off two tickets and handed them to Arthur.
He turned towards Fenny.
So did the woman with the raffle tickets.
She's retiring you see.
She hoisted the little smile even further up her face.
She would have to stop and let it go soon or the skin would surely split.
They're very nice prizes, you know.
Arthur snatched the tickets, and said thank you as sharply as he could.
The woman turned to Fenny once again.
Arthur nearly yelled.
She smiled sickeningly at both of them.
The woman finally departed to the table next to theirs.
Arthur turned desperately to Fenny, and was relieved to see that she was rocking with silent laughter.
He sighed and smiled.
She twirled the little wooden cocktail stick in her tomato juice.
Or half- brother really.
She looked at him sternly.
I shall be cross and disappointed if you do.
Plus I shall scream.
She smiled, shook her hair a little forward over her face and peered at him from behind it.
Might as well get it over with.
The woman with the perm and the smile and the now nearly empty book of cloakroom tickets was now waving the two last ones under his nose.
She wrinkled up he nose a little confidentially.
I know you'll like them.
And it is for Anjie's retirement present you see.
He held out two more ten pence pieces to her, and took the tickets.
A thought seemed to strike the woman.
It struck her very slowly.
You could watch it coming in like a long wave on a sandy beach.
She peered anxiously at both of them.
He glanced at Fenchurch.
She was grinning.
The woman nodded with knowing confidentiality.
Arthur turned, with a sigh, back to the girl that he found it hard to say whether he was in love with.
Don't be silly.
Or so they claim.
They refuse to elaborate.
She sipped demurely at her tomato juice and looked at her watch.
Arthur continued to gurgle for a moment or two.
She smiled and shrugged.
Arthur's heart went boom boom churn churn as she scribbled seven figures in pencil on a scrap of paper and handed it to him.
She was holding them out proudly for Arthur too see.
He could see that they were indeed a box of cherry brandy liqueurs and a record of bagpipe music.
That was what they were.
Arthur re-engaged his eyes with Fenchurch's once again, and suddenly was at a loss for something to say.
A moment had come and gone between the two of them, but the whole rhythm of it had been wrecked by that stupid, blasted woman.
She took a sip.
She gave a wry little smile and dropped her hair forward over her face again.
It was perfectly true.
He had to admit it was perfectly true.
Chapter 13 That night, at home, as he was prancing round the house pretending to be tripping through cornfields in slow motion and continually exploding with sudden laughter, Arthur thought he could even bear to listen to the album of bagpipe music he had won.
It was eight o'clock and he decided he would make himself, force himself, to listen to the whole record before he phoned her.
Maybe he should even leave it till tomorrow.
That would be the cool thing to do.
Or next week sometime.
No.
No games.
He wanted her and didn't care who knew it.
He definitely and absolutely wanted her, adored her, longed for her, wanted to do more things than there were names for with her.
Her eyes, her hair, her voice, everything...
He stopped.
He would put on the record of bagpipe music.
Then he would call her.
Would he, perhaps, call her first?
No.
What he would do was this.
He would put on the record of bagpipe music.
He would listen to it, every last banshee wail of it.
Then he would call her.
That was the correct order.
That was what he would do.
He was worried about touching things in case they blew up when he did so.
He picked up the record.
It failed to blow up.
He slipped it out of its cover.
He opened the record player, he turned on the amp.
They both survived.
He giggled foolishly as he lowered the stylus on to the disc.
He thought about his miraculous lunchtime.
Everyone in the pub turned to them and seemed to be expecting some sort of response.
They hadn't listened to the bit about how pleased and happy Anjie was going to be about the 4.30p everyone had helped to raise towards the cost of her kidney machine, had been vaguely aware that someone from the next table had won a box of cherry brandy liqueurs, and took a moment or two to cotton on to the fact that the yoo- hooing lady was trying to ask them if they had ticket number 37.
Arthur discovered that he had.
He glanced angrily at his watch.
Fenchurch gave him a push.
Don't be bad tempered.
Give them a nice speech about how pleased you are and you can give me a call and tell me how it went.
I'll want to hear the record.
She flicked his arm and left.
The regulars thought his acceptance speech a little over-effusive.
It was, after all, merely an album of bagpipe music.
Arthur thought about it, and listened to the music, and kept on breaking into laughter.
Chapter 14 Ring ring.
Ring ring.
Ring ring.
Yes, that's right.
Yes.
What?
It's Yvonne who does lunch, and Jim, he's the landlord.
No, I wasn't on.
What?
No, don't know anything about no raffle.
What?
The barmaid put her hand over the receiver and called over the noisy bar.
She put her hand over the receiver again.
Chapter 15 Eight hours West sat a man alone on a beach mourning an inexplicable loss.
He could only think of his loss in little packets of grief at a time, because the whole thing was too great to be borne.
He watched the long slow Pacific waves come in along the sand, and waited and waited for the nothing that he knew was about to happen.
As the time came for it not to happen, it duly didn't happen and so the afternoon wore itself away and the sun dropped beneath the long line of sea, and the day was gone.
It's very easy to believe that everyone you meet there is also a space traveller.
And somewhere on this good boffo stretch of coastline lay the house of this inconsolable man, a man whom many regarded as being insane.
But this was only, as he would tell people, because he was.
One of the many reasons why people thought him insane was because of the peculiarity of his house which, even in a land where most people's houses were peculiar in one way or another, was quite extreme in his peculiarness.
His house was called The Outside of the Asylum.
His name was simply John Watson, though he preferred to be called - and some of his friends had now reluctantly agreed to this - Wonko the Sane.
In his house were a number of strange things, including a grey glass bowl with eight words engraved upon it.
We can talk of him much later on - this is just an interlude to watch the sun go down and to say that he was there watching it.
He had lost everything he cared for, and was now simply waiting for the end of the world - little realizing that it had already been and gone.
Chapter 16 After a disgusting Sunday spent emptying rubbish bins behind a pub in Taunton, and finding nothing, no raffle ticket, no telephone number, Arthur tried everything he could to find Fenchurch, and the more things he tried, the more weeks passed.
He raged and railed against himself, against fate, against the world and its weather.
He even, in his sorrow and his fury, went and sat in the motorway service station cafeteria where he'd been just before he met her.
Arthur stared over the rim of his coffee cup at the grisly outside world.
It was a completely pointless place to be, he realized, and he had been driven there by superstition rather than logic.
However, as if to bait him with the knowledge that such coincidences could in fact happen, fate had chosen to reunite him with the lorry driver he had encountered there last time.
The more he tried to ignore him, the more he found himself being dragged back into the gravitic whirlpool of the man's exasperating conversation.
Arthur just shrugged.
He should go.
That's what he should do.
He should just go.
He thumped the table, spilt his tea, and actually, for a moment, appeared to be steaming.
You can't just walk off without responding to a remark like that.
It was hardly an elegant refutation, but it had to be said.
Arthur shook his head.
The man's eyebrows shot up, affronted.
Why's it stupid?
Arthur paused, warily.
Reserved special for old Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head here.
There's one reserved in every motorway caff between here and sunny Denmark.
Steer clear is my advice.
How's it going, Rob?
Keeping busy?
Got your wet-weather tyres on?
He breezed by and went to tell a joke about Britt Ekland to someone at a nearby table.
Arthur frowned.
He brandished his coffee spoon.
A diary.
Kept it for fifteen years.
Shows every single place I've ever been.
Every day.
And also what the weather was like.
All over England, Scotland, Wales I been.
All round the Continent, Italy, Germany, back and forth to Denmark, been to Yugoslavia.
It's all marked in and charted.
And he did.
Chapter 17 Misery, dejection.
More misery and more dejection.
He needed a project and he gave himself one.
He would find where his cave had been.
On prehistoric Earth he had lived in a cave, not a nice cave, a lousy cave, but...
There was no but.
It had been a totally lousy cave and he had hated it.
But he had lived in it for five years which made it home of some kind, and a person likes to keep track of his homes.
Arthur Dent was such a person and so he went to Exeter to buy a computer.
That was what he really wanted, of course, a computer.
But he felt he ought to have some serious purpose in mind before he simply went and lashed out a lot of readies on what people might otherwise mistake as being just a thing to play with.
So that was his serious purpose.
To pinpoint the exact location of a cave on prehistoric Earth.
He explained this to the man in the shop.
This was a tricky one.
The man sighed and his shoulders dropped.
Arthur wondered whether to mention Eddie the shipboard computer on the Heart of Gold, who could have done the job in a second, or Deep Thought, or - but decided he wouldn't.
Arthur bought the Apple anyway.
Over a few days he also acquired some astronomical software, plotted the movements of stars, drew rough little diagrams of how he seemed to remember the stars to have been in the sky when he looked up out of his cave at night, and worked away busily at it for weeks, cheerfully putting off the conclusion he knew he would inevitably have to come to, which was that the whole project was completely ludicrous.
Rough drawings from memory were futile.
Still, in the end he worked out a method which would at least produce a result.
He decided not to mind the fact that with the extraordinary jumble of rules of thumb, wild approximations and arcane guesswork he was using he would be lucky to hit the right galaxy, he just went ahead and got a result.
He would call it the right result.
Who would know?
As it happened, through the myriad and unfathomable chances of fate, he got it exactly right, though he of course would never know that.
He just went up to London and knocked on the appropriate door.
Arthur gaped in astonishment.
Chapter 18 A summer's day in Islington, full of the mournful wail of antique restoring machinery.
Fenchurch was unavoidably busy for the afternoon, so Arthur wandered in a blissed-out haze and looked at all the shops which, in Islington, are quite an useful bunch, as anyone who regularly needs old woodworking tools, Boer War helmets, drag, office furniture or fish will readily confirm.
The sun beat down over the roofgardens.
It beat on architects and plumbers.
It beat on barristers and burglars.
It beat on pizzas.
It beat on estate agent's particulars.
It beat on Arthur as he went into a restored furniture shop.
He wandered hazily on and found himself outside the offices of Greenpeace.
He marched in with a cheery smile and said he'd come to give them some money to help free the dolphins.
This wasn't quite the response he had expected, so he tried again.
This time they got quite angry with him, so he just left some money anyway and went back out into the sunshine.
Just after six he returned to Fenchurch's house in the alleyway, clutching a bottle of champagne.
The house was a small converted stable in a light industrial alleyway behind the derelict Royal Agricultural Hall of Islington.
As well as its large stable doors it also had a normal-looking front door of smartly glazed panelled wood with a black dolphin door knocker.
The one odd thing about this door was its doorstep, which was nine feet high, since the door was set into the upper of the two floors and presumably had been originally used to haul in hay for hungry horses.
An old pulley jutted out of the brickwork above the doorway and it was over this that the rope Arthur was holding was slung.
The door opened above his head.
Fenchurch leant down.
Arthur picked up his bag of goodies and went in through the stable doors, tingling.
The bottom room, which he had seen briefly before, was pretty rough and full of junk.
A large old cast-iron mangle stood there, a surprising number of kitchen sinks were piled in a corner.
There was also, Arthur was momentarily alarmed to see, a pram, but it was very old and uncomplicatedly full of books.
The floor was old stained concrete, excitingly cracked.
And this was the measure of Arthur's mood as he stared up the rickety wooden steps in the far corner.
Even a cracked concrete floor seemed to him an almost unbearably sensual thing.
In fact, thought Arthur as he looked about, the upper room was at least reasonably wonderful anyway.
It was simply decorated, furnished with things made out of cushions and also a stereo set with speakers which would have impressed the guys who put up Stonehenge.
There were flowers which were pale and pictures which were interesting.
There was a sort of gallery structure in the roof space which held a bed and also a bathroom which, Fenchurch explained, you could actually swing a cat in.
So.
They looked at each other for a moment.
The moment became a longer moment, and suddenly it was a very long moment, so long one could hardly tell where all the time was coming from.
For Arthur, who could usually contrive to feel self-conscious if left alone for long enough with a Swiss Cheese plant, the moment was one of sustained revelation.
He felt on the sudden like a cramped and zoo-born animal who awakes one morning to find the door to his cage hanging quietly open and the savannah stretching grey and pink to the distant rising sun, while all around new sounds are waking.
He wondered what the new sounds were as he gazed at her openly wondering face and her eyes that smiled with a shared surprise.
She turned away.
She was dressed in a rather severe dark dress, not a particularly shapely one, and it didn't really suit her.
He noticed as he slipped the champagne bottle into the door that it had an identical twin to sit next to.
He walked over to the window and looked out.
He turned and started to look at her records.
From above he heard the rustle of her dress fall to the ground.
He talked to himself about the sort of person he was.
He told himself very firmly that for this moment at least he would keep his eyes very firmly and steadfastly locked on to the spines of her records, read the titles, nod appreciatively, count the blasted things if he had to.
He would keep his head down.
This he completely, utterly and abjectly failed to do.
She was staring down at him with such intensity that she seemed hardly to notice that he was looking up at her.
Then suddenly she shook her head, dropped the light sundress over herself and disappeared quickly into the bathroom.
She emerged a moment later, all smiles and with a sunhat and came tripping down the steps with extraordinary lightness.
It was a strange kind of dancing motion she had.
She saw that he noticed it and put her head slightly on one side.
She closed the upstairs front door which had stood open all this time, and looked around the little room to see that it was all in a fit state to be left on its own for a while.
Arthur's eyes followed hers around, and while he was looking in the other direction she slipped something out of a drawer and into the canvas bag she was carrying.
Arthur looked back at her.
Her directness caught Arthur unprepared.
A pang of worry went through Arthur.
Just unusual.
She touched his hand, and then leant forward and kissed him briefly.
Arthur felt that if someone tapped him at that point he would have chimed, like the deep sustained rolling chime his grey fishbowl made when he flicked it with his thumbnail.
Chapter 19 Ford Prefect was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound of gunfire.
He slid himself out of the maintenance hatchway which he had fashioned into a bunk for himself by disabling some of the noisier machinery in his vicinity and padding it with towels.
He slung himself down the access ladder and prowled the corridors moodily.
They were claustrophobic and ill-lit, and what light there was continually flickering and dimming as power surged this way and that through the ship, causing heavy vibrations and rasping humming noises.
That wasn't it, though.
He paused and leaned back against the wall as something that looked like a small silver power drill flew past him down the dim corridor with a nasty searing screech.
That wasn't it either.
He clambered listlessly through a bulkhead door and found himself in a larger corridor, though still ill-lit.
The ship lurched.
It had been doing this a fair bit, but this was heavier.
A small platoon of robots weent by making a terrible clattering.
Still not it, though.
Acrid smoke was drifting up from one end of the corridor, so he walked along it in the other direction.
He passed a series of observation monitors let into the walls behind plates of toughened but still badly scratched perspex.
One of them showed some horrible green scaly reptilian figure ranting and raving about the Single Transferable Vote system.
It was hard to tell whether he was for or against it, but he clearly felt very strongly about it.
Ford turned the sound down.
That wasn't it, though.
He passed another monitor.
It was showing a commercial for some brand of toothpaste that would apparently make you feel free if you used it.
There was nasty blaring music with it too, but that wasn't it.
He came upon another, much larger three-dimensional screen that was monitoring the outside of the vast silver Xaxisian ship.
As he watched, a thousand horribly beweaponed Zirzla robot starcruisers came searing round the dark shadow of a moon, silhouetted against the blinding disc of the star Xaxis, and the ship simultaneously unleashed a vicious blaze of hideously incomprehensible forces from all its orifices against them.
That was it.
Ford shook his head irritably and rubbed his eyes.
He slumped on the wrecked body of a dull silver robot which clearly had been burning earlier on, but had now cooled down enough to sit on.
He yawned and dug his copy of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy out of his satchel.
He activated the screen, and flicked idly through some level three entries and some level four entries.
He was looking for some good insomnia cures.
He found REST, which was what he reckoned he needed.
He found REST AND RECUPERATION and was about to pass on when he suddenly had a better idea.
He looked up at the monitor screen.
The battle was raging more fiercely every second and the noise was appalling.
The ship juddered, screamed, and lurched as each new bolt of stunning energy was delivered or received.
He looked back down at the Guide again and flipped through a few likely locations.
He suddenly laughed, and then rummaged in his satchel again.
He pulled out a small memory dump module, wiped off the fluff and biscuit crumbs, and plugged it into an interface on the back of the Guide.
When all the information that he could think was relevant had been dumped into the module, he unplugged it again, tossed it lightly in the palm of his hand, put the Guide away in his satchel, smirked, and went in search of the ship's computer data banks.
Arthur and Fenchurch giggled about this to each other as they passed.
She hugged him more tightly for a moment.
This is certain.
This is indisputable.
He turned sharply and squinted through his spectacles at Fenchurch.
Arthur steered her away and could feel her silently quaking.
Your left elbow.
The summer sun was sinking through the tress in the park, looking as if - Let's not mince words.
Hyde Park is stunning.
Everything about it is stunning except for the rubbish on Monday mornings.
Even the ducks are stunning.
Anyone who can go through Hyde Park on a summer's evening and not feel moved by it is probably going through in an ambulance with the sheet pulled over their face.
It is a park in which people do more extraordinary things than they do elsewhere.
Arthur and Fenchurch found a man in shorts practising the bagpipes to himself under a tree.
The piper paused to chase off an American couple who had tried, timidly to put some coins on the box his bagpipes came in.
He started resolutely to reinflate his bag, but even the noise this made could not disfigure their mood.
Arthur put his arms around her and moved them slowly downwards.
They kissed for so long that eventually the piper went and practised on the other side of the tree.
They found a patch of grass which was relatively free of couples actually lying on top of each other and sat and watched the stunning ducks and the low sunlight rippling on the water which ran beneath the stunning ducks.
Arthur laughed.
Arthur glanced at his watch.
I'd got the time of the train wrong.
Fenchurch laughed.
I prefer the Times.
Laden with all these new possessions, I go and sit at a table.
And don't ask me what the table was like because this was some time ago and I can't remember.
Me sitting at the table.
On my left, the newspaper.
On my right, the cup of coffee.
Briefcase.
Business suit.
I know the type.
Fenchurch looked at him in astonishment.
Fenchurch thought about it.
I braced myself.
I ate the biscuit.
I ate it very deliberately and visibly, so that he would have no doubt as to what it was I was doing.
He took another biscuit, he ate it.
Clear as daylight.
Fenchurch stirred uncomfortably.
What do you say?
Doesn't work.
But they met.
Just for an instant.
And we both looked away.
There was a little tension building up over the table.
So.
When the empty packet was lying dead between us the man at last got up, having done his worst, and left.
I heaved a sigh of relief, of course.
She gasped and tossed herself back on the grass laughing.
She sat up again.
She pushed him backwards, rolled over him, kissed him and rolled off again.
He was surprised at how light she was.
She looked out over the kale and pondered.
And not funny like yours, but...
She looked down.
Arthur could feel that it was one of those sorts of moments.
The air seemed to stand still around them, waiting.
Arthur wished that the air would go away and mind its own business.
Anyway.
We have got to that bit.
When I was a kid I had this picture hanging over the foot of my bed...
I think it's moving well.
You're getting the bedroom interest in nice and early.
I was plagued with them too.
These rabbits were in fact on a raft, as were assorted rats and owls.
There was an otter swimming in front of the raft, and I used to lie awake at night worrying about this otter having to pull the raft, with all these wretched animals on it who shouldn't even be on a raft, and the otter had such a thin tail to pull it with I thought it must hurt pulling it all the time.
Worried me.
Not badly, but just vaguely, all the time.
Never seen it before.
She shrugged.
Fenchurch laughed and hugged her legs.
That's exactly what I felt.
But you see, I've felt that before, even stronger.
Incredibly strongly.
Arthur was at sea, could hardly speak, and felt it wiser, therefore, for the moment not to try.
No, it wasn't like that in fact, it was more as if I was being connected into something, bit by bit.
She nodded, and seemed to believe him.
Suddenly, she gripped his arm.
And the loss is unbearable.
I was sitting there, having a cup of tea.
This was after days of this build up, the feeling of becoming connected up.
I think I was buzzing gently.
And there was some work going on at a building site opposite the cafe, and I was watching it through the window, over the rim of my teacup, which I always find is the nicest way of watching other people working.
And suddenly, there it was in my mind, this message from somewhere.
And it was so simple.
It made such sense of everything.
I was so startled I almost dropped my teacup, in fact I think I did drop it.
She shook her head, and shook it again, as if trying to clear it, which is what she was trying to do.
She patted the grass lightly, as if for reassurance, and then seemed to change her mind about what she was going to say.
I suppose I've been in and out ever since.
She looked up at him.
But now it seemed to go swimmy around him, as it had that night in the car when Fenchurch's brother had told him the silly stories about the CIA agent in the reservoir.
The trees went swimmy.
The lake went swimmy, but this was perfectly natural and nothing to be alarmed by because a grey goose had just landed on it.
The geese were having a great relaxed time and had no major answers they wished to know the questions to.
Arthur shook his head.
Arthur had shaken his head, not to disagree with her suggestion which he thought was a truly excellent one, one of the world's great suggestions, but because he was just for a moment trying to free himself of the recurring impression he had that just when he was least expecting it the Universe would suddenly leap out from behind a door and go boo at him.
It's just a word, it doesn't explain anything.
She put her hand on his knee, which made him realize that the tingling going up and down his spine was not her gently stroking his back, and must instead be one of the nasty creepy feelings he so often got when people were trying to explain things to him.
You're saying the dolphins all disappeared?
She stared him intently in his startled eyes.
All gone.
She searched his face.
It was clear from his startled expression that he did not.
She paused.
She shrugged, and then looked at him long and quietly.
She lay her hand on the side of his face.
She glanced around the park, which was now being gathered into the clutches of dusk.
Arthur slowly let out a long year of a sigh.
Fenchurch leaned across him and drew over her canvas bag.
In Russell's car that night.
You dropped it.
Arthur drew the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy from its cover.
It was like a small, thin, flexible lap computer.
He tapped some buttons till the screen flared with text.
Chapter 21 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy is, as has been remarked before often and accurately, a pretty startling kind of a thing.
It is, essentially, as the title implies, a Guide book.
The problem is, or rather one of the problems, for there are many, a sizeable portion of which are continually clogging up the civil, commercial and criminal courts in all areas of the Galaxy, and especially, where possible, the more corrupt ones, this.
The previous sentence makes sense.
That is not the problem.
This is: Change.
Read it through again and you'll get it.
The Galaxy is a rapidly changing place.
There is, frankly, so much of it, every bit of which is continually on the move, continually changing.
A bit of a nightmare, you might think, for a scrupulous and conscientious editor diligently striving to keep this massively detailed and complex electronic tome abreast of all the changing circumstances and conditions that the Galaxy throws up every minute of every hour of every day, and you would be wrong.
Entries tend to get updated or not across the Sub-Etha Net according to if they read good.
Take for example, the case of Brequinda on the Foth of Avalars, famed in myth, legend and stultifyingly dull tri-d mini-serieses as home of the magnificent and magical Fuolornis Fire Dragon.
In Ancient days, when Fragilis sang and Saxaquine of the Quenelux held sway, when the air was sweet and the nights fragrant, but everyone somehow managed to be, or so they claimed, though how on earth they could have thought that anyone was even remotely likely to believe such a preposterous claim what with all the sweet air and fragrant nights and whatnot is anyone's guess, virgins, it was not possible to heave a brick on Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars without hitting at least half a dozen Fuolornis Fire Dragons.
Whether you would want to do that is another matter.
Not that Fire Dragons weren't an essentially peace-loving species, because they were.
They adored it to bits, and this wholesale adoring of things to bits was often in itself the problem: one so often hurts the one loves, especially if one is a Fuolornis Fire Dragon with breath like a rocket booster and teeth like a park fence.
Another problem was that once they were in the mood they often went on to hurt quite a lot of the ones that other people loved as well.
Add to all that the relatively small number of madmen who actually went around the place heaving bricks, and you end up with a lot of people on Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars getting seriously hurt by dragons.
But did they mind?
They did not.
Were they heard to bemoan their fate?
No.
The Fuolornis Fire Dragons were revered throughout the lands of Brequinda in the Foth of valors for their savage beauty, their noble ways and their habit of biting people who didn't revere them.
Why was this?
The answer was simple.
Sex.
There is, for some unfathomed reason, something almost unbearably sexy about having huge fire-breathing magical dragons flying low about the sky on moonlit nights which were already dangerously on the sweet and fragrant side.
Why this should be so, the romance-besotted people of Brequinda in the Foth of Avalars could not have told you, and would not have stopped to discuss the matter once the effect was up and going, for no sooner would a flock of half a dozen silk-winged leather-bodied Fuolornis Fire Dragons heave into sight across the evening horizon than half the people of Brequinda are scurrying off into the woods with the other half, there to spend a busy breathless night together and emerge with the first rays of dawn all smiling and happy and still claiming, rather endearingly, to be virgins, if rather flushed and sticky virgins.
Pheromones, some researchers said.
Something sonic, others claimed.
The place was always stiff with researchers trying to get to the bottom of it all and taking a very long time about it.
Not surprisingly, the Guide's graphically enticing description of the general state of affairs on this planet has proved to be astonishingly popular amongst hitch-hikers who allow themselves to be Guided by it, and so it has simply never been taken out, and it is therefore left to latter-day travellers to find out for themselves that today's modern Brequinda in the City State of Avalars is now little more than concrete, strip joints and Dragon Burger Bars.
Chapter 22 The night in Islington was sweet and fragrant.
There were, of course, no Fuolornis Fire Dragons about in the alley, but if any had chanced by they might just as well have sloped off across the road for a pizza, for they were not going to be needed.
Had an emergency cropped up while they were still in the middle of their American Flots with extra anchovy they could always have sent across a message to put Dire Straits on the stereo, which is now known to have much the same effect.
Arthur put Dire Straits on the stereo.
Fenchurch pushed ajar the upstairs front door to let in a little more of the sweet fragrant night air.
They both sat on some of the furniture made out of cushions, very close to the open bottle of champagne.
Fie moved his hand.
Mark Knopfler has an extraordinary ability to make a Schecter Custom Stratocaster hoot and sing like angels on a Saturday night, exhausted from being good all week and needing a stiff beer - which is not strictly relevant at this point since the record hadn't yet got to that bit, but there will be too much else going on when it does, and furthermore the chronicler does not intend to sit here with a track list and a stopwatch, so it seems best to mention it now while things are still moving slowly.
I can tell you do.
She smiled in the dim light, and wriggled her shoulders noncommittally against the cushions.
Since there are cushions in the Universe, on Squornshellous Beta to be exact, two worlds in from the swampland of the mattresses, that actively enjoy being wriggled against, particularly if it's noncommittally because of the syncopated way in which the shoulders move, it's a pity they weren't there.
They weren't, but such is life.
Arthur held her left foot in his lap and looked it over carefully.
All kinds of stuff about the way her dress fell away from her legs was making it difficult for him to think particularly clearly at this point.
There was a slight catch in her voice.
Feeling increasingly puzzled, Arthur let her left foot down on the floor and moved himself around so that he could take her right foot.
She moved forward, put her arms round and kissed him, because the record had got to that bit which, if you knew the record, you would know made it impossible not to do this.
Then she gave him her right foot.
Fie stroked it, ran his fingers round her ankle, under her toes, along her instep, could find nothing wrong with it.
She watched him with great amusement, laughed and shook her head.
Arthur stopped, and frowned at her left foot on the floor.
She did another of the shrugs which would have brought such joy into the life of a simple cushion from Squornshellous Beta.
He frowned.
He let her right foot down to the floor and stood up.
So did she.
He picked her up in his arms and they kissed again.
Still puzzled, he did so.
She looked at him almost challengingly.
Arthur still did not understand.
He sat on the floor, then got down on his hands and knees to look at her feet, in situ, as it were, in their normal habitat.
And as he looked closely, something odd struck him.
He pit his head right down to the ground and peered.
There was a long pause.
He sat back heavily.
Arthur looked up at her quickly and saw the deep apprehension making her eyes suddenly dark.
She bit her lip and was trembling.
She shook the hair forwards over her eyes that were filling with dark fea rful tears.
He stood up quickly, put his arms around her and gave her a single kiss.
The record got to the good bit.
Chapter 23 The battle raged on about the star of Xaxis.
Hundreds of the fierce and horribly beweaponed Zirzla ships had now been smashed and wrenched to atoms by the withering forces the huge silver Xaxisian ship was able to deploy.
Part of the moon had gone too, blasted away by those same blazing forceguns that ripped the very fabric of space as they passed through it.
The Zirzla ships that remained, horribly beweaponed though they were, were now hopelessly outclassed by the devastating power of the Xaxisian ship, and were fleeing for cover behind the rapidly disintegrating moon, when the Xaxisian ship, in hurtling pursuit behind them, suddenly announced that it needed a holiday and left the field of battle.
All was redoubled fear and consternation for a moment, but the ship was gone.
With the stupendous powers at its command it flitted across vast tracts of irrationally shaped space, quickly, effortlessly, and above all, quietly.
Deep in his greasy, smelly bunk, fashioned out of a maintenance hatchway, Ford Prefect slept among his towels, dreaming of old haunts.
He dreamed at one point in his slumbers of New York.
In his dream he was walking late at night along the East Side, beside the river which had become so extravagantly polluted that new lifeforms were now emerging from it spontaneously, demanding welfare and voting rights.
One of those now floated past, waving.
Ford waved back.
The thing thrashed to the shore and struggled up the bank.
I'm completely new to the Universe in all respects.
Life is entirely strange to me.
Flere was something that Ford felt he could speak about with authority.
It's got pips inside, too.
Deep in his bunk.
Ford Prefect wriggled and turned on to his other side.
It wasn't his favourite type of dream because it didn't have Eccentrica Gallumbits, the Triple-Breasted Whore of Eroticon VI in it, whom many of his dreams did feature.
But at least it was a dream.
At least he was asleep.
Chapter 24 Luckily there was a strong updraft in the alley because Arthur hadn't done this sort of thing for a while, at least, not deliberately, and deliberately is exactly the way you are not meant to do it.
He swung down sharply, nearly catching himself a nasty crack on the jaw with the doorstep and tumbled through the air, so suddenly stunned with what a profoundly stupid thing he had just done that he completely forgot the bit about hitting the ground and didn't.
A nice trick, he thought to himself, if you can do it.
The ground was hanging menacingly above his head.
He tried not to think about the ground, what an extraordinarily big thing it was and how much it would hurt him if it decided to stop hanging there and suddenly fell on him.
He tried to think nice thoughts about lemurs instead, which was exactly the right thing to do because he couldn't at that moment remember precisely what a lemur was, if it was one of those things that sweep in great majestic herds across the plains of wherever it was or if that was wildebeests, so it was a tricky kind of thing to think nice thoughts about without simply resorting to an icky sort of general well-disposedness towards things, and all this kept his mind well occupied while his body tried to adjust to the fact that it wasn't touching anything.
A Mars bar wrapper fluttered down the alleyway.
After a seeming moment of doubt and indecision it eventually allowed the wind to ease it, fluttering, between him and the ground.
The ground was still hanging menacingly above his head, and he thought it was probably time to do something about that, such as fall away from it, which is what he did.
Slowly.
Very, very slowly.
As he fell slowly, very, very slowly, he closed his eyes - carefully, so as not to jolt anything.
The feel of his eyes closing ran down his whole body.
Once it had reached his feet, and the whole of his body was alerted to the fact that his eyes were now closed and was not panicked by it, he slowly, very, very slowly, revolved his body one way and his mind the other.
That should sort the ground out.
He could feel the air clear about him now, breezing around him quite cheerfully, untroubled by his being there, and slowly, very, very slowly, as from a deep and distant sleep, he opened his eyes.
He had flown before, of course, flown many times on Krikkit until all the birdtalk had driven him scatty, but this was different.
Here he was on his own world, quietly, and without fuss, beyond a slight trembling which could have been attributable to a number of things, being in the air.
Ten or fifteen feet below him was the hard tarmac and a few yards off to the right the yellow street lights of Upper Street.
Luckily the alleyway was dark since the light which was supposed to see it through the night was on an ingenious timeswitch which meant it came on just before lunchtime and went off again as the evening was beginning to draw in.
He was, therefore, safely shrouded in a blanket of dark obscurity.
He slowly, very, very slowly, lifted his head to Fenchurch, who was standing in silent breathless amazement, silhouetted in her upstairs doorway.
Her face was inches from his.
But then I realized that I could see what you were doing.
You were flying.
She bit her lip and shook her head, not so much to say no, but just in sheer bewilderment.
She was shaking like a leaf.
That's the important bit.
Just to demonstrate how easy it was he floated away down the alley, fell upwards quite dramatically and bobbed back down to her like a banknote on a breath of wind.
She shrugged in bewilderment.
Arthur bobbed down a little lower and held out his hand.
Nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if she was trying to step on the hand of someone who was floating in front of her in midair, she stepped on to his hand.
Nervously, hesitantly, almost, she told herself, as if - She stopped telling herself what she was doing was like because she had a feeling she didn't altogether want to know.
She fixed her eyes very firmly on the guttering of the roof of the decrepit warehouse opposite which had been annoying her for weeks because it was clearly going to fall off and she wondered if anyone was going to do anything about it or whether she ought to say something to somebody, and didn't think for a moment about the fact that she was standing on the hands of someone who wasn't standing on anything at all.
She thought that the warehouse belonged to the carpet company who had their offices round the corner, and took the weight off her left foot, so she should probably go and see them about the gutter.
She hadn't seen the guttering from quite this angle before, and it looked to her now as if as well as the mud and gunge up there might also be a bird's nest.
If she leaned forward just a little and took her weight off her right foot, she could probably see it more clearly.
Arthur was alarmed to see that someone down in the alley was trying to steal her bicycle.
He particularly didn't want to get involved in an argument at the moment and hoped that the guy would do it quietly and not look up.
He had the quiet shifty look of someone who habitually stole bicycles in alleys and habitually didn't expect to find their owners hovering several feet above them.
He was relaxed by both these habits, and went about his job with purpose and concentration, and when he found that the bike was unarguably bound by hoops of tungsten carbide to an iron bar embedded in concrete, he peacefully bent both its wheels and went on his way.
Arthur let out a long-held breath.
Chapter 25 Those who are regular followers of the doings of Arthur Dent may have received an impression of his character and habits which, while it includes the truth and, of course, nothing but the truth, falls somewhat short, in its composition, of the whole truth in all its glorious aspects.
And the reasons for this are obvious.
Editing, selection, the need to balance that which is interesting with that which is relevant and cut out all the tedious happenstance.
Like this for instance.
He went up the stairs, all fifteen of them, opened the door, went into his room, took off his shoes and socks and then all the rest of his clothes one by one and left them in a neatly crumpled heap on the floor.
He put on his pyjamas, the blue ones with the stripe.
He washed his face and hands, cleaned his teeth, went to the lavatory, realized that he had once again got this all in the wrong order, had to wash his hands again and went to bed.
He read for fifteen minutes, spending the first ten minutes of that trying to work out where in the book he had got to the previous night, then he turned out the light and within a minute or so more was asleep.
He lay on his left side for a good hour.
Another hour after this his eyes flickered briefly and he slightly scratched his nose, though there was still a good twenty minutes to go before he turned back on to his left side.
And so he whiled the night away, sleeping.
It's guff.
It doesn't advance the action.
It makes for nice fat books such as the American market thrives on, but it doesn't actually get you anywhere.
You don't, in short, want to know.
But there are other omissions as well, beside the teethcleaning and trying to find fresh socks variety, and in some of these people have often seemed inordinately interested.
What, they want to know, about all that stuff off in the wings with Arthur and Trillian, did that ever get anywhere?
To which the answer is, of course, mind your own business.
And what, they say, was he up to all those nights on the planet Krikkit?
Just because the planet didn't have Fuolornis Fire Dragons or Dire Straits doesn't mean that everyone just sat up every night reading.
Or to take a more specific example, what about the night after the committee meeting party on Prehistoric Earth, when Arthur found himself sitting on a hillside watching the moon rise over the softly burning trees in company with a beautiful young girl called Mella, recently escaped from a lifetime of staring every morning at a hundred nearly identical photographs of moodily lit tubes of toothpaste in the art department of an advertising agency on the planet Golgafrincham.
What then?
What happened next?
And the answer is, of course, that the book ended.
The next one didn't resume the story till five years later, and you can, claim some, take discretion too far.
Is he interested in nothing more than tea and the wider issues of life?
Has he no spirit?
Has he no passion?
Those who wish to know should read on.
Others may wish to skip on to the last chapter which is a good bit and has Marvin in it.
Chapter 26 Arthur Dent allowed himself for an unworthy moment to think, as they drifted up, that he very much hoped that his friends who had always found him pleasant but dull, or more latterly, odd but dull, were having a good time in the pub, but that was the last time, for a while, that he thought of them.
They drifted up, spiralling slowly around each other, like sycamore seeds falling from sycamore trees in the autumn, except going the other way.
And as they drifted up their minds sang with the ecstatic knowledge that either what they were doing was completely and utterly and totally impossible or that physics had a lot of catching up to do.
Physics shook its head and, looking the other way, concentrated on keeping the cars going along the Euston Road and out towards the Westway flyover, on keeping the streetlights lit and on making sure that when somebody on Baker Street dropped a cheeseburger it went splat upon the ground.
Dwindling headily beneath them, the beaded strings of light of London - London, Arthur had to keep reminding himself, not the strangely coloured fields of Krikkit on the remote fringes of the galaxy, lighted freckles of which faintly spanned the opening sky above them, but London - swayed, swaying and turning, turned.
Her voice seemed strangely clear but distant in all the vast empty air.
It was breathy and faint with disbelief - all those things, clear, faint, distant, breathy, all at the same time.
Physics glanced at Arthur, and clotted with horror he was gone too, sick with giddy dropping, every part of him screaming but his voice.
They plummeted because this was London and you really couldn't do this sort of thing here.
He couldn't catch her because this was London, and not a million miles from here, seven hundred and fifty-six, to be exact, in Pisa, Galileo had clearly demonstrated that two falling bodies fell at exactly the same rate of acceleration irrespective of their relative weights.
They fell.
Arthur realized as he fell, giddily and sickeningly, that if he was going to hang around in the sky believing everything that the Italians had to say about physics when they couldn't even keep a simple tower straight, that they were in dead trouble, and damn well did fall faster than Fenchurch.
He grappled her from above, and fumbled for a tight grip on her shoulders.
He got it.
Fine.
They were now falling together, which was all very sweet and romantic, but didn't solve the basic problem, which was that they were falling, and the ground wasn't waiting around to see if he had any more clever tricks up his sleeve, but was coming up to meet them like an express train.
He couldn't support her weight, he hadn't anything he could support it with or against.
The only thing he could think was that they were obviously going to die, and if he wanted anything other than the obvious to happen he was going to have to do something other than the obvious.
Here he felt he was on familiar territory.
He let go of her, pushed her away, and when she turned her face to him in a gasp of stunned horror, caught her little finger with his little finger and swung her back upwards, tumbling clumsily up after her.
Just below cloud level they paused and scanned where they had impossibly come.
The ground was something not to regard with any too firm or steady an eye, but merely to glance at, as it were, in passing.
Fenchurch tried some little swoops, daringly, and found that if she judged herself just right against a body of wind she could pull off some really quite dazzling ones with a little pirouette at the end, followed by a little drop which made her dress billow around her, and this is where readers who are keen to know what Marvin and Ford Prefect have been up to all this while should look ahead to later chapters, because Arthur now could wait no longer and helped her take it off.
It drifted down and away whipped by the wind until it was a speck which finally vanished, and for various complicated reasons revolutionized the life of a family on Flounslow, over whose washing line it was discovered draped in the morning.
In a mute embrace, they drifted up till they were swimming amongst the misty wraiths of moisture that you can see feathering around the wings of an aeroplane but never feel because you are sitting warm inside the stuffy aeroplane and looking through the little scratchy perspex window while somebody else's son tries patiently to pour warm milk into your shirt.
Arthur and Fenchurch could feel them, wispy cold and thin, wreathing round their bodies, very cold, very thin.
They felt, even Fenchurch, now protected from the elements by only a couple of fragments from Marks and Spencer, that if they were not going to let the force of gravity bother them, then mere cold or paucity of atmosphere could go and whistle.
The two fragments from Marks and Spencer which, as Fenchurch rose now into the misty body of the clouds, Arthur removed very, very slowly, which is the only way it's possible to do it when you're flying and also not using your hands, went on to create considerable havoc in the morning in, respectively, counting from top to bottom, Isleworth and Richmond.
They were in the cloud for a long time, because it was stacked very high, and when finally they emerged wetly above it, Fenchurch slowly spinning like a starfish lapped by a rising tidepool, they found that above the clouds is where the night get seriously moonlit.
The light is darkly brilliant.
There are different mountains up there, but they are mountains, with their own white arctic snows.
They had emerged at the top of the high-stacked cumulo-nimbus, and now began lazily to drift down its contours, as Fenchurch eased Arthur in turn from his clothes, prised him free of them till all were gone, winding their surprised way down into the enveloping whiteness.
She kissed him, kissed his neck, his chest, and soon they were drifting on, turning slowly, in a kind of speechless T-shape, which might have caused even a Fuolornis Fire Dragon, had one flown past, replete with pizza, to flap its wings and cough a little.
There were, however, no Fuolornis Fire Dragons in the clouds nor could there be for, like the dinosaurs, the dodos, and the Greater Drubbered Wintwock of Stegbartle Major in the constellation Fraz, and unlike the Boeing 747 which is in plentiful supply, they are sadly extinct, and the Universe shall never know their like again.
The reason that a Boeing 747 crops up rather unexpectedly in the above list is not unconnected with the fact that something very similar happened in the lives of Arthur and Fenchurch a moment or two later.
They are big things, terrifyingly big.
You know when one is in the air with you.
There is a thunderous attack of air, a moving wall of screaming wind, and you get tossed aside, if you are foolish enough to be doing anything remotely like what Arthur and Fenchurch were doing in its close vicinity, like butterflies in the Blitz.
This time, however, there was a heart-sickening fall or loss of nerve, a re-grouping moments later and a wonderful new idea enthusiastically signalled through the buffeting noise.
Mr.s E. Kapelsen of Boston, Massachusetts was an elderly lady, indeed, she felt her life was nearly at an end.
She had seen a lot of it, been puzzled by some, but, she was a little uneasy to feel at this late stage, bored by too much.
It had all been very pleasant, but perhaps a little too explicable, a little too routine.
With a sigh she flipped up the little plastic window shutter and looked out over the wing.
At first she thought she ought to call the stewardess, but then she thought no, damn it, definitely not, this was for her, and her alone.
By the time her two inexplicable people finally slipped back off the wing and tumbled into the slipstream she had cheered up an awful lot.
She was mostly immensely relieved to think that virtually everything that anybody had ever told her was wrong.
The following morning Arthur and Fenchurch slept very late in the alley despite the continual wail of furniture being restored.
The following night they did it all over again, only this time with Sony Walkmen.
You see, there's this difference between us.
That you lost something and found it again, and I found something and lost it.
She had to go out for the day, so Arthur settled down for a day of telephoning.
Murray Bost Henson was a journalist on one of the papers with small pages and big print.
It would be pleasant to be able to say that he was none the worse for it, but sadly, this was not the case.
He happened to be the only journalist that Arthur knew, so Arthur phoned him anyway.
Murray had his own special kind of conversation language which he had invented for his own use, and which no one else was able to speak or even to follow.
Hardly any of it meant anything at all.
The bits which did mean anything were often so wonderfully buried that no one could ever spot them slipping past in the avalance of nonsense.
The time when you did find out, later, which bits he did mean, was often a bad time for all concerned.
Plus it would fit like a whatsit in one of those other things with the other stories of the week, so it could be just to have you denying it.
There was a slight pause, at the end of which Murray Bost Henson came back on the line sounding genuinely shaken.
There was a pause while Murray wrote this down.
Fits in with the general weirdness of the week.
Week of the Weirdos, we're thinking of calling it.
All documented in his little black book, it all checks out at every single funloving level.
The Met Office is going ice cold thick banana whips, and funny little men in white coats are flying in from all over the world with their little rulers and boxes and drip feeds.
This man is the bee's knees, Arthur, he is the wasp's nipples.
He is, I would go so far as to say, the entire set of erogenous zones of every major flying insect of the Western world.
We're calling him the Rain God.
There was an impressed pause from Murray Bost Henson's end of the phone.
An absolute bundle has absolutely been done by you.
Listen, do you know how much a tour operator is paying that guy not to go to Malaga this year?
I mean forget irrigating the Sahara and boring stuff like that, this guy has a whole new career ahead of him, just avoiding places for money.
The man's turning into a monster, Arthur, we might even have to make him win the bingo.
This is the real seethingly crazy one.
This is the real meatballs in the batter.
Locals are phoning in all the time to say there's this couple who go flying nights.
We've got guys down in our photo labs working through the night to put together a genuine photograph.
Oh, space, right, I got your quote.
But that was months ago.
Listen, it's night after night this week, my old cheesegrater, right on your patch.
This couple just fly around the sky and start doing all kinds of stuff.
And I don't mean looking through walls or pretending to be box girder bridges.
I'll send the guy with the camera and the hose.
Last year's news.
You can't sustain a story, you know, when the only news is the continuing absence of whatever the story's about.
Not our territory anyway, try the Sundays.
But what's anybody going to do now?
The story dies, Arthur.
I just want to find out how I can get in touch with that guy in California who claims to know something about it.
He showed her the long narrow booklets of airline tickets.
He sat down heavily, realized he was missing something and went to the fridge to find it.
She fiddled listlessly with the tickets.
Fie went across to the telephone machine and fiddled and fumed with all its buttons for a while, because it was the one which was particularly recommended by Which magazine and is almost impossible to use without going mad.
The voice was thin and crackly with its journey to a geostationary satellite and back, but it was also hauntingly calm.
It's in the Asylum you see.
Wonko the Sane does not like to enter the Asylum and so he does not.
I feel you should know this because it may save you phoning.
If you would like to meet him, this is very easily arranged.
All you have to do is walk in.
Arcane Jill Watson again.
On the tape, Arthur's voice had to admit that he had not.
You may find that it clarifies things for you a little.
You may find that it indicates to you where the Asylum is.
The sound of the phone line went dead.
Arthur turned the machine off.
Fenchurch looked up at him again with a thoughtful frown, and looked at the tickets again.
This is flight 121 to Los Angeles.
Chapter 30 They rented a car in Los Angeles from one of the places that rents out cars that other people have thrown away.
They stayed for one night in a hotel on Sunset Boulevard which someone had told them they would enjoy being puzzled by.
It was true.
There was one and that was exactly what he was doing.
The garage attendant didn't think much of their car, but that was fine because they didn't either.
Late in the evening they drove through the Hollywood hills along Mulholland Drive and stopped to look out first over the dazzling sea of floating light that is Los Angeles, and later stopped to look across the dazzling sea of floating light that is the San Fernando Valley.
They agreed that the sense of dazzle stopped immediately at the back of their eyes and didn't touch any other part of them and came away strangely unsatisfied by the spectacle.
As dramatic seas of light went, it was fine, but light is meant to illuminate something, and having driven through what this particularly dramatic sea of light was illuminating they didn't think much of it.
They slept late and restlessly and awoke at lunchtime when it was stupidly hot.
They drove out along the freeway to Santa Monica for their first look at the Pacific Ocean, the ocean which Wonko the Sane spent all his days and a good deal of his nights looking at.
Their mood lifted further as the sun began to move down the western half of the sky, and by the time they were back in their rattling car and driving towards a sunset that no one of any sensibility would dream of building a city like Los Angeles on front of, they were suddenly feeling astonishingly and irrationally happy and didn't even mind that the terrible old car radio would only play two stations, and those simultaneously.
So what, they were both playing good rock and roll.
Arthur wondered if he would and hoped that he would, and hoped that what Fenchurch had lost could be found here, on this Earth, whatever this Earth might prove to be.
He hoped, as he had hoped continually and fervently since the time they had talked together on the banks of the Serpentine, that he would not be called upon to try to remember something that he had very firmly and deliberately buried in the furthest recesses of his memory, where he hoped it would cease to nag at him.
In Santa Barbara they stopped at a fish restaurant in what seemed to be a converted warehouse.
Fenchurch had red mullet and said it was delicious.
Arthur had a swordfish steak and said it made him angry.
He grabbed a passing waitress by the arm and berated her.
Chapter 31 If you took a couple of David Bowies and stuck one of the David Bowies on the top of the other David Bowie, then attached another David Bowie to the end of each of the arms of the upper of the first two David Bowies and wrapped the whole business up in a dirty beach robe you would then have something which didn't exactly look like John Watson, but which those who knew him would find hauntingly familiar.
He was tall and he gangled.
When he sat in his deckchair gazing at the Pacific, not so much with any kind of wild surmise any longer as with a peaceful deep dejection, it was a little difficult to tell exactly where the deckchair ended and he began, and you would hesitate to put your hand on, say, his forearm in case the whole structure suddenly collapsed with a snap and took your thumb off.
But his smile when he turned it on you was quite remarkable.
When he spoke, you were glad that he used the smile that made you feel like that pretty often.
They sit right here.
He was talking of the angels with the golden beards and green wings and Dr. Scholl sandals.
So, er... when is this then?
He gazed out at the Pacific as well.
There were little sandpipers running along the margin of the shore which seemed to have this problem: they needed to find their food in the sand which a wave had just washed over, but they couldn't bear to get their feet wet.
To deal with this problem they ran with an odd kind of movement as if they'd been constructed by somebody very clever in Switzerland.
Fenchurch was sitting on the sand, idly drawing patterns in it with her fingers.
He smiled.
A tiny cough from Fenchurch attracted his attention and he looked round at her.
She had scratched a little stick figure drawing in the sand of the two of them in the clouds.
For a moment he thought she was trying to get him excited, then he realized that she was rebuking him.
His house was certainly peculiar, and since this was the first thing that Fenchurch and Arthur had encountered it would help to know what it was like.
What it was like was this: It was inside out.
Actually inside out, to the extent that they had to park on the carpet.
All along what one would normally call the outer wall, which was decorated in a tasteful interior-designed pink, were bookshelves, also a couple of those odd three-legged tables with semi-circular tops which stand in such a way as to suggest that someone just dropped the wall straight through them, and pictures which were clearly designed to soothe.
Where it got really odd was the roof.
It folded back on itself like something that Maurits C. Escher, had he been given to hard nights on the town, which is no part of this narrative's purpose to suggest was the case, though it is sometimes hard, looking at his pictures, particularly the one with the awkward steps, not to wonder, might have dreamed up after having been on one, for the little chandeliers which should have been hanging inside were on the outside pointing up.
Confusing.
Inside, of course, was where the Outside was.
Rough brickwork, nicely done painting, guttering in good repair, a garden path, a couple of small trees, some rooms leading off.
And the inner walls stretched down, folded curiously, and opened at the end as if, by an optical illusion which would have had Maurits C. Escher frowning and wondering how it was done, to enclose the Pacific Ocean itself.
They liked him.
He had an open, engaging quality and seemed able to mock himself before anybody else did.
He said it with a hunted look, as if he was worried that she might suddenly leap out from behind the door and mention them again.
Wonko the Sane laughed.
It was a light easy laugh, and sounded like one he had used a lot before and was happy with.
This was the point at which Arthur began to feel a little nervous again.
He pointed again at the rough brickwork, the pointing and the guttering.
I've tried to decorate it nicely to keep the inmates happy, but there's very little one can do.
I never go in there now myself.
They are the words that finally turned me into the hermit I have now become.
It was quite sudden.
The sign said: Hold stick near centre of its length.
Moisten pointed end in mouth.
Insert in tooth space, blunt end next to gum.
Use gentle in-out motion.
He gazed out at the Pacific again, as if daring it to rave and gibber at him, but it lay there calmly and played with the sandpipers.
Which is why I call myself Wonko the Sane, just to reassure people on this point.
They went out on to the beach, which was where he started talking about angels with golden beards and green wings and Dr. Scholl sandals.
I have them.
I'll get them.
They are made by the Dr. Scholl company, and the angels say that they particularly suit the terrain they have to work in.
They say they run a concession stand by the message.
When I say I don't know what that means they say no, you don't, and laugh.
As he walked back towards the inside, or the outside depending on how you looked at it, Arthur and Fenchurch looked at each other in a wondering and slightly desperate sort of way, then each shrugged and idly drew figures in the sand.
It doesn't feel so odd in the sand.
Or in the water.
The water touches them perfectly.
She shrugged.
When Wonko returned he was carrying something that stunned Arthur.
Not the sandals, they were perfectly ordinary wooden- bottomed sandals.
Just out of curiousity.
I'm not trying to prove anything, by the way.
I'm a scientist and I know what constitutes proof.
But the reason I call myself by my childhood name is to remind myself that a scientist must also be absolutely like a child.
If he sees a thing, he must say that he sees it, whether it was what he thought he was going to see or not.
See first, think later, then test.
But always see first.
Otherwise you will only see what you were expecting.
Most scientists forget that.
I'll show you something to demonstrate that later.
So, the other reason I call myself Wonko the Sane is so that people will think I am a fool.
That allows me to say what I see when I see it.
You can't possibly be a scientist if you mind people thinking that you're a fool.
This was the thing that Arthur had been stunned to see him carrying, for it was a wonderful silver-grey glass fish bowl, seemingly identical to the one in Arthur's bedroom.
Finally his time had come, but he missed it by a millisecond.
Or at least I did have.
Russell nicked it to put his golfballs in.
I don't know where it came from, just that I was angry with Russell for nicking it.
They both became aware that Wonko the Sane was glancing sharply backwards and forwards between them, and trying to get a gasp in edgeways.
They both said it.
Fie looked long and calmly at each of them, then he held up the bowl to catch the light of the Californian sun.
The bowl seemed almost to sing with the sun, to chime with the intensity of its light, and cast darkly brilliant rainbows around the sand and upon them.
Fie turned it, and turned it.
They each shook their heads slowly, and with wonder, almost hypnotized by the flashing of the lightning shadows in the grey glass.
Fie shook his head with a slow, slow smile, and then looked again at Fenchurch, and then at Arthur.
Fie tailed off.
He shook his head again.
He seemed lost with his own thoughts for a moment.
Then I held it to my ear.
They both shook their heads, again slowly, again dumbly.
Chapter 32 The deep roar of the ocean.
The break of waves on further shores than thought can find.
The silent thunders of the deep.
And from among it, voices calling, and yet not voices, humming trillings, wordlings, the half-articulated songs of thought.
Greetings, waves of greetings, sliding back down into the inarticulate, words breaking together.
A crash of sorrow on the shores of Earth.
Waves of joy on - where?
A world indescribably found, indescribably arrived at, indescribably wet, a song of water.
A fugue of voices now, clamouring explanations, of a disaster unavertable, a world to be destroyed, a surge of helplessness, a spasm of despair, a dying fall, again the break of words.
And then the fling of hope, the finding of a shadow Earth in the implications of enfolded time, submerged dimensions, the pull of parallels, the deep pull, the spin of will, the hurl and split of it, the flight.
A new Earth pulled into replacement, the dolphins gone.
Then stunningly a single voice, quite clear.
And then the sound of long, heavy, perfectly grey bodies rolling away into an unknown fathomless deep, quietly giggling.
Chapter 33 That night they stayed Outside the Asylum and watched TV from inside it.
He's over in your country running an investigation.
It was a press conference.
Let's be straight here.
If we find something we can't understand we like to call it something you can't understand, or indeed pronounce.
I mean if we just let you go around calling him a Rain God, then that suggests that you know something we don't, and I'm afraid we couldn't have that.
Rain God!
Huh, never heard such nonsense in my life.
Admittedly, you wouldn't catch me going on holiday with him.
Chapter 34 On the way home there was a woman sitting next to them on the plane who was looking at them rather oddly.
They talked quietly to themselves.
Arthur sighed and took out a piece of paper.
She dug around and found one.
Finally he passed the paper to her.
She looked at it.
Sevorbeupstry.
Planet of Preliumtarn.
Sun-Zarss.
Arthur looked out of the scratchy little perspex window at the open sky outside.
I get so bored on these long flights, it's nice to talk to somebody.
My name's Enid Kapelsen, I'm from Boston.
Chapter 35 They went to Arthur's house in the West Country, shoved a couple of towels and stuff in a bag, and then sat down to do what every Galactic hitch hiker ends up spending most of his time doing.
They waited for a flying saucer to come by.
Fie caught himself doing something he had never really expected to do again.
Fie wondered where Ford Prefect was.
By an extraordinary coincidence, the following day there were two reports in the paper, one concerning the most astonishing incidents with a flying saucer, and the other about a series of unseemly riots in pubs.
Ford Prefect turned up the day after that looking hung over and complaining that Arthur never answered the phone.
In fact he looked extremely ill, not merely as if he'd been pulled through a hedge backwards, but as if the hedge was being simultaneously pulled backwards through a combine harvester.
Fie staggered into Arthur's sitting room, waving aside all offers of support, which was an error, because the effort caused him to lose his balance altogether and Arthur had eventually to drag him to the sofa.
Fie followed Arthur wobbily into the kitchen.
Ford seemed oddly disappointed.
He looked about the place forlornly.
I explained this to the lady.
He frowned.
So!
I really hate those guys you know.
This was perfectly true, and a very respectable view widely held by right thinking people, who are largely recognizable as being right thinking people by the mere fact that they hold this view.
His five-year mission to seek out and explore strange new worlds, and sell Advanced Music Substitute Systems to their restaurants, elevators and wine bars!
Or if they didn't have restaurants, elevators and wine bars yet, to artificially accelerate their civilization growth until they bloody well did have!
I have now remembered what I did next.
I saved civilization as we know it.
He stumbled determinedly back into the sitting room, where he seemed to carry on talking to himself, tripping over the furniture and making beep beep noises.
A couple of minutes later, wearing his very placid face, Arthur followed him.
Ford looked stunned.
He had long ago realized that the only way of being in Ford's company successfully was to keep a large stock of very placid faces and wear them at all times.
He hurled himself recklessly at a chair and broke it.
You missed that bit too?
That's the suspended animation facility!
I put the guy in the suspended animation facility.
Arthur, who was about to replace the phone, which was for some mysterious reason lying on the table, off the hook, paused, placidly.
Arthur put the phone to his ear.
He threw himself, sweating, on to the sofa.
Chapter 36 The flying saucer in which Ford Prefect had stowed away had stunned the world.
Finally there was no doubt, no possibility of mistake, no hallucinations, no mysterious CIA agents found floating in reservoirs.
This time it was real, it was definite.
It was quite definitely definite.
It had come down with a wonderful disregard for anything beneath it and crushed a large area of some of the most expensive real estate in the world, including much of Flarrods.
The thing was massive, nearly a mile across, some said, dull silver in colour, pitted, scorched and disfigured with the scars of unnumbered vicious space battles fought with savage forces by the light of suns unknown to man.
A hatchway opened, crashed down through the Flarrods Food Flails, demolished Flarvey Nicholls, and with a final grinding scream of tortured architecture, toppled the Sheraton Park Tower.
After a long, heart-stopping moment of internal crashes and grumbles of rending machinery, there marched from it, down the ramp, an immense silver robot, a hundred feet tall.
It held up a hand.
Ford Prefect, of course, had an explanation for this, as he sat with Arthur and watched the non-stop frenetic news reports on the television, none of which had anything to say other than to record that the thing had done this amount of damage which was valued at that amount of billions of pounds and had killed this totally other number of people, and then say it again, because the robot was doing nothing more than standing there, swaying very slightly, and emitting short incomprehensible error messages.
Nothing anything like so straightforward.
On its world, the people are people.
The leaders are lizards.
Ford shrugged again.
But I haven't and I am.
Anyway, what are you looking so placid and moon-eyed for?
Arthur said yes, he was, and said it placidly.
He did because Fenchurch came in at that moment with a pile of newspapers she'd been into the village to buy.
She stopped in astonishment at the wreckage on the table and the wreckage from Betelgeuse on the sofa.
They had some kids or something.
Chapter 37 For a total of three days and nights the giant silver robot stood in stunned amazement straddling the remains of Knightsbridge, swaying slightly and trying to work out a number of things.
Government deputations came to see it, ranting journalists by the truckload asked each other questions on the air about what they thought of it, flights of fighter bombers tried pathetically to attack it - but no lizards appeared.
It scanned the horizon slowly.
At night it was at its most spectacular, floodlit by the teams of television crews who covered it continuously as it continuously did nothing.
It thought and thought and eventually reached a conclusion.
It would have to send out its service robots.
It should have thought of that before, but it was having a number of problems.
The tiny flying robots came screeching out of the hatchway one afternoon in a terrifying cloud of metal.
They roamed the surrounding terrain, frantically attacking some things and defending others.
One of them at last found a pet shop with some lizards, but it instantly defended the pet shop for democracy so savagely that little in the area survived.
A turning point came when a crack team of flying screechers discovered the Zoo in Regent's Park, and most particularly the reptile house.
Learning a little caution from their previous mistakes in the petshop, the flying drills and fretsaws brought some of the larger and fatter iguanas to the giant silver robot, who tried to conduct high- level talks with them.
Eventually the robot announced to the world that despite the full, frank and wide-ranging exchange of views the high level talks had broken down, the lizards had been retired, and that it, the robot would take a short holiday somewhere, and for some reason selected Bournemouth.
Ford Prefect, watching it on TV, nodded, laughed, and had another beer.
Immediate preparations were made for its departure.
The flying toolkits screeched and sawed and drilled and fried things with light throughout that day and all through the night time, and in the morning, stunningly, a giant mobile gantry started to roll westwards on several roads simultaneously with the robot standing on it, supported within the gantry.
Westward it crawled, like a strange carnival buzzed around by its servants and helicopters and news coaches, scything through the land until at last it came to Bournemouth, where the robot slowly freed itself from it transport system's embraces and went and lay for ten days on the beach.
It was, of course, by far the most exciting thing that had ever happened to Bournemouth.
Crowds gathered daily along the perimeter which was staked out and guarded as the robot's recreation area, and tried to see what it was doing.
It was doing nothing.
It was lying on the beach.
It was lying a little awkwardly on its face.
It was a journalist from a local paper who, late one night, managed to do what no one else in the world had so far managed, which was to strike up a brief intelligible conversation with one of the service robots guarding the perimeter.
It was an extraordinary breakthrough.
The little flying ratchet screwdriver said it would see what it cold do and screeched off.
A reply was never forthcoming.
Curiously, however, the questions on the piece of paper more or less exactly matched the questions that were going through the massive battle-scarred industrial quality circuits of the robot's mind.
Early the following day things started to be packed up and within a few days it became apparent that the robot was preparing to leave for good.
Ford looked wildly at his watch.
Chapter 38 Crowds thronged as close as they could to the giant silver craft, which wasn't very.
The immediate perimeter was fenced off and patrolled by the tiny flying service robots.
Staked out around that was the army, who had been completely unable to breach that inner perimeter, but were damned if anybody was going to breach them.
They in turn were surrounded by a cordon of police, though whether they were there to protect the public from the army or the army from the public, or to guarantee the giant ship's diplomatic immunity and prevent it getting parking tickets was entirely unclear and the subject of much debate.
The inner perimeter fence was now being dismantled.
The army stirred uncomfortably, uncertain of how to react to the fact that the reason for their being there seemed as if it was simply going to get up and go.
The giant robot had lurched back aboard the ship at lunchtime, and now it was five o'clock in the afternoon and no further sign had been seen of it.
Much had been heard - more grindings and rumblings from deep within the craft, the music of a million hideous malfunctions; but the sense of tense expectation among the crowd was born of the fact that they tensely expected to be disappointed.
This wonderful extraordinary thing had come into their lives, an now it was simply going to go without them.
Two people were particularly aware of this sensation.
Arthur and Fenchurch scanned the crowd anxiously, unable to find Ford Prefect in it anywhere, or any sign that he had the slightest intention of being there.
Fie gave a hollow laugh.
The last parts of the robot's gantry transport were being carried on board, and the few remaining sections of the perimeter fence were now stacked at the bottom of the ramp waiting to follow them.
The soldiers on guard round the ramp bristled meaningfully, orders were barked back and forth, hurried conferences were held, but nothing, of course, could be done about any of it.
Hopelessly, and with no clear plan now, Arthur and Fenchurch pushed forward through the crowd, but since the whole crowd was also trying to push forward through the crowd, this got them nowhere.
And within a few minutes more nothing remained outside the ship, every last link of the fence was aboard.
A couple of flying fret saws and a spirit level seemed to do one last check around the site, and then screamed in through the giant hatchway themselves.
A few seconds passed.
The sounds of mechanical disarray from within changed in intensity, and slowly, heavily, the huge steel ramp began to lift itself back out of the Harrods Food Halls.
The sound that accompanied it was the sound of thousands of tense, excited people being completely ignored.
A megaphone barked from a taxi which screeched to a halt on the edge of the milling crowd.
Through.
The door flew open and a small man from somewhere in the vicinity of Betelgeuse leapt out wearing a white coat.
Ford Prefect grabbed his megaphone from out of the taxi and started bawling at the crowd through it.
Completely at random he pointed at Arthur and Fenchurch, who wrestled their way back out of the crowd and clustered urgently round the taxi.
It's all under control, there's nothing to see.
It is merely a major scientific breakthrough.
Keep calm now.
Important scientific equipment.
Flungry for new excitement, delighted at this sudden reprieve from disappointment, the crowd enthusiastically fell back and started to open up.
Arthur was a little surprised to see what was printed on the boxes of important scientific equipment in the back of the taxi.
Hurriedly he manoeuvred out the large supermarket trolley that was also jammed against the back seat.
It clattered to the ground, and together they loaded the boxes into it.
There was the distant sound of police sirens.
The crowd surged and closed behind them again, as frantically they pushed and hauled the rattling supermarket trolley through the rubble towards the ramp.
The resulting seconds of utter confusion allowed them to get the supermarket trolley to the edge of the ramp, and to haul it up on to the lip of it.
Beneath them, the huge ramp juddered and bega slowly to heave its way upwards.
Chapter 39 Arthur Dent was irritated to be continually wakened by the sound of gunfire.
Being careful not to wake Fenchurch, who was still managing to sleep fitfully, he slid his way out of the maintenance hatchway which they had fashioned into a kind of bunk for themselves, slung himself down the access ladder and prowled the corridors moodily.
They were claustrophobic and ill-lit.
The lighting circuits buzzed annoyingly.
This wasn't it, though.
He paused and leaned backwards as a flying power drill flew past him down the dim corridor with a nasty screech, occasionally clanging against the walls like a confused bee as it did so.
That wasn't it either.
He clambered through a bulkhead door and found himself in a larger corridor.
Acrid smoke was drifting up from one end so he walked towards the other.
He came to an observation monitor let into the wall behind a plate of toughened but still badly scratched perspex.
He was watching The Magnificent Seven.
With a sigh and a headache, Arthur sat down beside him and watched the good bit.
Do you realize I never saw it all through?
Always I missed the end.
I saw half of it again the night before the Vogons came.
When they blew the place up I thought I'd never get to see it.
Chapter 40 There remains little still to tell.
Beyond what used to be known as the Limitless Lightfields of Flanux until the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine were discovered lying behind them, lie the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine.
Within the Grey Binding Fiefdoms of Saxaquine lies the star named Zarss, around which orbits the planet Preliumtarn in which is the land of Sevorbeupstry, and it was to the land of Sevorbeupstry that Arthur and Fenchurch came at last, a little tired by the journey.
And in the land of Sevorbeupstry, they came to the Great Red Plain of Rars, which was bounded on the South side by the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, on the further side of which, according to the dying words of Prak, they would find in thirty-foot-high letters of fire God's Final Message to His Creation.
According to Prak, if Arthur's memory saved him right, the place was guarded by the Lajestic Vantrashell of Lob, and so, after a manner, it proved to be.
He was a little man in a strange hat and he sold them a ticket.
They realized they were not the first to pass that way, for the path that led around the left of the Great Plain was well-worn and dotted with booths.
At one they bought a box of fudge, which had been baked in an oven in a cave in the mountain, which was heated by the fire of the letters that formed God's Final Message to His Creation.
At another they bought some postcards.
She waved them on.
Every twenty miles or so there was a little stone hut with showers and sanitary facilities, but the going was tough, and the high sun baked down on the Great Red Plain, and the Great Red Plain rippled in the heat.
They drank a couple of sodas in the shade of the booth and then trudged out into the sun again.
They stared ahead at the distant black speck winking in the heat haze; they looked behind themselves.
They elected to go on.
They then discovered that they were not only not the first ones to make this journey, but that they were not the only ones making it now.
Some way ahead of them an awkward low shape was heaving itself wretchedly along the ground, stumbling painfully slowly, half-limping, half-crawling.
It was moving so slowly that before too long they caught the creature up and could see that it was made of worn, scarred and twisted metal.
It groaned at them as they approached it, collapsing in the hot dry dust.
And pain as well, so much of that, and so much time to suffer it in too.
One or the other on its own I could probably manage.
It's the two together that really get me down.
The word died away in a kind of crackle and flakes of rust fell out of its mouth.
My memory banks are not what they were you know, and any word which falls into disuse for a few zillion years has to get shifted down into auxiliary memory back-up.
The robot's battered head snapped up a bit as if in thought.
He thought a little longer.
He scraped a knee along pathetically in the dust, an then tried to twist himself up on his misshapen elbows.
His head scratched round in its rusty neck bearings and seemed to scan the distant horizon.
He rasped his way through a coughing fit and resumed.
My time at last has nearly come.
My race is nearly run.
It would be fitting.
Between them they picked him up despite his feeble protests and insults.
The metal was so hot it nearly blistered their fingers, but he weighed surprisingly little, and hung limply between their arms.
They carried him with them along the path that ran along the left of the Great Red Plain of Rars toward the encircling mountains of Quentulus Quazgar.
Arthur attempted to explain to Fenchurch, but was too often interrupted by Marvin's dolorous cybernetic ravings.
They tried to see if they could get him some spare parts at one of the booths, but Marvin would have none of it.
He seemed almost imperceptibly to brighten for a moment.
His head bobbed between them with the effort of memory.
I mentioned to you that I had this terrible pain in all the diodes down my left side?
He left a longish pause before he continued.
They carried him on between them, under the baking sun that hardly ever seemed to move, let alone set.
Go on, see if you can guess.
At last they reached the last of the little booths, set down Marvin between them and rested in the shade.
Fenchurch bought some cufflinks for Russell, cufflinks that had set in them little polished pebbles which had been picked up from the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, directly underneath the letters of fire in which was written God's Final Message to His Creation.
Arthur flipped through a little rack of devotional tracts on the counter, little meditations on the meaning of the Message.
They heaved up Marvin between them.
They rounded the foot of the Quentulus Quazgar Mountains, and there was the Message written in blazing letters along the crest of the Mountain.
There was a little observation vantage point with a rail built along the top of a large rock facing it, from which you could get a good view.
It had a little pay-telescope for looking at the letters in detail, but no one would ever use it because the letters burned with the divine brilliance of the heavens and would, if seen through a telescope, have severely damaged the retina and optic nerve.
They gazed at God's Final Message in wonderment, and were slowly and ineffably filled with a great sense of peace, and of final and complete understanding.
Fenchurch sighed.
They had been staring at it for fully ten minutes before they became aware that Marvin, hanging between their shoulders, was in difficulties.
The robot could no longer lift his head, had not read the message.
They lifted his head, but he complained that his vision circuits had almost gone.
They found a coin and helped him to the telescope.
He complained and insulted them, but they helped him look at each individual letter in turn.
The lights went out in his eyes for absolutely the very last time ever.
Luckily, there was a stall nearby where you could rent scooters from guys with green wings.
Epilogue One of the greatest benefactors of all lifekind was a man who couldn't keep his mind on the job in hand.
Brilliant?
Certainly.
One of the foremost genetic engineers of his or any other generation, including a number he had designed himself?
Without a doubt.
The problem was that he was far too interested in things which he shouldn't be interested in, at least, as people would tell him, not now.
He was also, partly because of this, of a rather irritable disposition.
So he sat by a window and looked out at a summer lawn and designed and designed and designed, but inevitably got a little distracted by things, and by the time the invaders were practically in orbit round them, had come up with a remarkable new breed of super-fly that could, unaided, figure out how to fly through the open half of a half-open window, and also an off-switch for children.
Celebrations of these remarkable achievements seemed doomed to be shortlived because disaster was imminent as the alien ships were landing.
But astoundingly, the fearsome invaders who, like most warlike races were only on the rampage because they couldn't cope with things at home, were stunned by Versenwald's extraordinary breakthroughs, joined in the celebrations and were instantly prevailed upon to sign a wide-ranging series of trading agreements and set up a programme of cultural exchanges.
And, in an astonishing reversal of normal practice in the conduct of such matters, everybody concerned lived happily ever after.
There was a point to this story, but it has temporarily escaped the chronicler's mind.
DOUGLAS ADAMS YOUNG ZAPHOD PLAYS IT SAFE A large flying craft moved swiftly across the surface of an astoundingly beautiful sea.
Any sophisticated knowledgeable person, who had knocked about, seen a few things, would probably have remarked on how much the craft looked like a filing cabinet - a large and recently burgled filing cabinet lying on its back with its drawers in the air and flying.
The islanders, whose experience was of a different kind, were instead struck by how little it looked like a lobster.
They chattered excitedly about its total lack of claws, its stiff unbending back, and the fact that it seemed to experience the greatest difficulty staying on the ground.
This last feature seemed particularly funny to them.
They jumped up and down on the spot a lot to demonstrate to the stupid thing that they themselves found staying on the ground the easiest thing in the world.
But soon this entertainment began to pall for them.
At that exact moment the craft stopped suddenly in mid-air, then upended itself and plunged headlong into the ocean with a great crash of spray which sent them shouting into the trees.
When they reemerged, nervously, a few minutes later, all they were able to see was a smoothly scarred circle of water and a few gulping bubbles.
That's odd, they said to each other between mouthfuls of the best lobster to be had anywhere in the Western Galaxy, that's the second time that's happened in a year.
The craft which wasn't a lobster dived direct to a depth of two hundred feet, and hung there in the heavy blueness, while vast masses of water swayed about it.
High above, where the water was magically clear, a brilliant formation of fish flashed away.
Below, where the light had difficulty reaching, the color of the water sank to a dark and savage.
Here, at two hundred feet, the sun streamed feebly.
A large, silk skinned sea-mammal rolled idly by, inspecting the craft with a kind of half interest, as if it had half expected to find something of this kind around about here, and then it slid on up and away toward the rippling light.
The craft waited for a minute or two, taking readings, and then descended another hundred feet.
At this depth it was becoming seriously dark.
After a moment or two the internal lights of the craft shut down, an in the second or so that passed before the main external beams suddenly; stabbed out, the only visible light came from a small hazily illuminated pink sign which read The Beeblebrox Salvage and Really Wild Stuff Corporation.
The huge beams switched downward, catching a vast shoal of silver fish which swiveled away in silent panic.
In the dim control room, which extended in a broad bow from the craft's blunt prow, four heads were gathered around a computer display that was analyzing the very, very faint and intermittent signals that emanated from deep on the sea bed.
The two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration responded to this with a very cold stare, but the man with the odd, or rather the even, number of heads missed it.
Zaphod exchanged weary glances with himself.
Only it doesn't get there because the pilot takes a detour - is this right? - to pick up some lobster...?
OK, so the guy is cool, but...
He got a good calming grip on the remaining beer can.
The two officials had said nothing.
Conversation at this level was not something to which they felt they could aspire.
He stabbed a finger at the intermittent readings trickling over the computer screen.
They meant nothing to him but he didn't like the look of them at all.
They were all squiggly with lots of long numbers and things.
Is that the story?
Is that what we're going down to find?
The two officials waited calmly.
They coughed slightly to help pass the time.
The ship thought about this for a few milliseconds and then, after double checking all the seals on its heavy duty bulkheads, it began slowly, inexorably, in the hazy blaze of its lights, to sink to the lowest depths.
Five hundred feet.
A thousand.
Two thousand.
Here, at a pressure of nearly seventy atmospheres, in the chilling depths where no light reaches, nature keeps its most heated imaginings.
Two foo6: long nightmares loomed wildly into the bleaching light, yawned, and vanished back into the blackness.
Two and a half thousand feet.
At the dim edges of the ship's lights guilty secrets flitted by with their eyes on stalks.
Gradually the topography of the distantly approaching ocean bed resolved with greater and greater clarity on the computer displays until as last a shape could be made out that was separate and distinct from its surroundings.
It was like a huge lopsided cylindrical fortress that widened sharply halfway along its length to accommodate the heavy ultraplating with which the crucial storage holds were clad, and which were supposed by its builders to have made this the most secure and impregnable spaceship ever built.
Before launch the material structure of this section had been battered, rammed, blasted and subjected to every assault its builders knew it could withstand in order to demonstrate that it could withstand them.
The tense silence in the cockpit tightened perceptibly as it became dear that it was this section that had broken rather neatly in two.
Three thousand, eight hundred and twenty-five feet.
Four Hi-Presh-A Smart Suits moved slowly out of the open hatchway of the salvage craft and waded through the barrage of its lights toward the monstrous shape that loomed darkly out of the sea night.
They moved with a sort of clumsy grace, near weightlessness though weighed on by a world of water.
With his right-hand head Zaphod peered up into the black immensities above him and for a moment his mind sang with a silent roar of horror.
He glanced to his left and was relieved to see that his other head was busy watching the Brockian Ultra-Cricket broadcasts on the helmet vid without concern.
Slightly behind him to his left walked the two officials from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration, slightly in front of him to his right walked the empty suit, carrying their implements and testing the way for them.
They passed the huge rift in the broken backed Starship Billion Year Bunker, and played their flashlights up into it.
Mangled machinery loomed between torn and twisted bulkheads, two feet thick.
A family of large transparent eels lived in there now and seemed to like it.
The empty suit preceded them along the length of the ship's gigantic murky hull, trying the airlocks.
The third one it tested ground open uneasily.
They crowded inside it and waited for several long minutes while the pump mechanisms dealt with the hideous pressure that the ocean exerted, and slowly replaced it with an equally hideous pressure of air and inert gases.
At last the inner door slid open and they were admitted to a dark outer holding area of the Starship Billion Year Bunker.
Several more high security Titan-O-Hold doors had to be passed through, each of which the officials opened with a selection of quark keys.
Soon they were so deep within the heavy security fields that the UltraCricket broadcasts were beginning to fade, and Zaphod had to switch to one of the rock video stations, since there was nowhere that they were not able to reach.
A final doorway slid open, and they emerged into a large sepulchral space.
Zaphod played his flashlight against the opposite wall and it fell full on a wild-eyed screaming face.
Zaphod screamed a diminished fifth himself, dropped his light and sat heavily on the floor, or rather on a body which had been lying there undisturbed for around six months and which reacted to being sat on by exploding with great violence.
Zaphod wondered what to do about all this, and after a brief but hectic internal debate decided that passing out would be the very thing.
He came to a few minutes later and pretended not to know who he was, where he was or how he had got there, but was nor able to convince anybody.
He then pretended that his memory suddenly retuned with a rush and that the shock caused him to pass out again, but he was helped unwillingly to his feet by the empty suit - which he was beginning to take a serious dislike to - and forced to come to terms with his surroundings: They were dimly and fitfully lit and unpleasant in a number of respects, the most obvious of which was the colorful arrangement of parts of the ship's late lamented Navigation Officer over the floor, walls and ceiling, and especially over the lower half of his, Zaphod's, suit.
The effect of this was so astoundingly nasty that we shall not be referring to it again at any point in this narrative - other than to record briefly the fact that it caused Zaphod to throw up inside his suit, which he therefore removed and swapped, after suitable headgear modifications, with the empty one.
Unfortunately the stench of the fetid air in the ship, followed by the sight of his own suit walking around casually draped in rotting intestines was enough to make him throw up in the other suit as well, which was a problem that he and the suit would simply have to live with.
There.
All done.
No more nastiness.
At least, no more of that particular nastiness.
The owner of the screaming face had calmed down very slightly now and was babbling away incoherently in a large tank of yellow liquid- emergency suspension tank.
I told him we could always try the lobster on the way back, but he was crazy.
Obsessed!
Do you ever get like that about lobster?
Because I don't.
Seems to me it's all rubbery and fiddly to eat, and not that much taste, well I mean is there?
I infinitely prefer scallops, and said so.
Zaphod stared at this extraordinary apparition, flailing in its tank.
The man was attached to all kinds of life-support tubes, and his voice was bubbling out of speakers that echoed insanely around the ship, returning as haunting echoes from deep and distant corridors.
I couldn't believe what we were doing and just to prove a point about lobster which is really so overrated as a food, I'm sorry to go on about lobsters so much.
I'll try and stop in a minute, but they've been on my mind so much for the months I've been in this tank, can you imagine what it's like to be stuck in a ship with the same guys for months eating junk food when all one guy will talk about is lobster and then spend six months floating by yourself in a tank thinking about it.
I promise I will try and shut up about the lobsters, I really will.
Lobsters, lobsters, lobsters - enough!
I think I'm the only survivor.
I'm the only one who managed to get to an emergency tank before we went down.
I sent out the Mayday and then we hit.
It's a disaster, isn't it?
A total disaster, and all because the guy liked lobsters.
How much sense am I making?
He gazed at them beseechingly, and his mind seemed to sway slowly back down to earth like a falling leaf.
He blinked and looked at them oddly like a monkey peering at a strange fish.
He scrabbled curiously with his wrinkled up fingers at the glass side of the tank.
Tiny, thick yellow bubbles loosed themselves from his mouth and nose, caught briefly in his swab of hair and strayed on upward.
He strode over to the main computer bank in the middle of the chamber and started checking quickly through the ship's main monitor circuits for damage reports.
Aorist rods were devices used in a now happily abandoned form of energy production.
When the hunt for new sources of energy had at one point got particularly frantic, one bright young chap suddenly spotted that one place which had never used up all its available energy - the past.
And with the sudden rush of blood to the head that such insights tend to induce, he invented a way of mining it that very same night, and within a year huge tracts of the past were being drained of all their energy and simply wasting away Those who claimed that the past should be left unspoiled were accused of indulging in an extremely expensive form of sentimentality.
The past provided a very cheap, plentiful and clean source of energy, there could always be a few Natural Past Reserves set up if anyone wanted to pay for their upkeep, and as for the claim that draining the past impoverished the present, well, maybe it did, slightly, but the effects were immeasurable and you really had to keep a sense of proportion.
It was only when it was realized that the present really was being impoverished, and that the reason for it was that those selfish plundering wastrel bastards up in the future were doing exactly the same thing, that everyone realized that every single aorist rod, and the terrible secret of how they were made, would have to be utterly and forever destroyed.
They claimed it was for the sake of their grandparents and grandchildren, but it was of course for the sake of their grandparent's grandchildren, and their grandchildren's grandparents.
The official from the Safety and Civil Reassurance Administration gave a dismissive shrug.
The other official rounded on him sharply.
The first shrugged again.
He can say what he likes.
No one would believe him.
It's why we chose to use him rather than do anything official, isn't it?
The more wild the story he tells, the more it'll sound like he's some hippy adventurer making it up.
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing chemical weapons so powerful that a teaspoonful could fatally infect an entire planet.
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing zeta-activq. compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could blow up a whole planet.
He said the same thing as they passed holds containing theta-active compounds so powerful that a teaspoonful could irradiate a whole planet.
They were approaching the hold nearest to the point where the back of the Starship Billion Year Bunker was broken.
The corridor here was twisted and deformed, and the floor was damp and sticky in patches.
Neither official answered.
Instead, they examined the hold door very carefully and saw that its seals were twisted apart by the forces that had deformed the whole corridor.
One of them touched the door lightly.
It swung open to his touch.
There was darkness inside, with just a couple of dim yellow lights deep within it.
The leading official turned to the other.
The other official nodded and left without a word.
The first official quietly beckoned Zaphod in.
The large dim yellow lights glowed about twenty feet from them.
No one.
At least no one that crazy would ever get near them.
Anyone that mad or dangerous rings very deep alarm bells.
The results were uniformly disastrous.
Most of them were just poor pathetic misfits, but some were deeply, deeply dangerous.
Dangerous because they didn't ring alarm bells in other people.
They could walk through situations the way that ghosts walk through walls, because no one spotted the danger.
They are not evil, in fact they are rather simple and charming.
Zaphod looked at the dim yellow lights, the two dim yellow lights.
As his eyes became accustomed to the light he saw that the two lights framed a third space where something was broken.
Wet sticky patches gleamed dully on the floor.
Zaphod and the official walked cautiously toward the lights.
At that moment, four words came crashing into the helmet headsets from the other official.
Zaphod slid aside a large ground-glass door.
Beyond it lay a tank full of thick yellow liquid, and floating in it was a man, a kindly looking man with lots of pleasant laugh lines around his face.
He seemed to be floating quite contentedly and smiling to himself.
Another terse message suddenly came through his helmet headset.
The planet toward which the escape capsule had headed had already been identified.
It was in Galactic Sector ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha.
The kindly looking man in the tank seemed to be babbling gently to himself, just as the co-pilot had been in his tank.
Little yellow bubbles beaded on the man's lips.
Zaphod found a small speaker by the tank and turned it on.
He heard the man babbling gently about a shining city on a hill.
DOUGLAS ADAMS MOSTLY HARMLESS For Ron With grateful thanks to Sue Freestone and Michael Bywater for their support, help and the constructive abuse.
Anything that happens, happens.
Anything that, in happening, causes something else to happen, causes something else to happen.
Anything that, in happening, causes itself to happen again, happens again.
It doesn't necessarily do it in chronological order, though.
Chapter 1 The history of the Galaxy has got a little muddled, for a number of reasons: partly because those who are trying to keep track of it have got a little muddled, but also because some very muddling things have been happening anyway.
One of the problems has to do with the speed of light and the difficulties involved in trying to exceed it.
You can't.
Nothing travels faster than the speed of light with the possible exception of bad news, which obeys its own special laws.
The Hingefreel people of Arkintoofle Minor did try to build spaceships that were powered by bad news but they didn't work particularly well and were so extremely unwelcome whenever they arrived anywhere that there wasn't really any point in being there.
So, by and large, the peoples of the Galaxy tended to languish in their own local muddles and the history of the Galaxy itself was, for a long time, largely cosmological.
Which is not to say that people weren't trying.
They tried sending off fleets of spaceships to do battle or business in distant parts, but these usually took thousands of years to get anywhere.
By the time they eventually arrived, other forms of travel had been discovered which made use of hyperspace to circumvent the speed of light, so that whatever battles it was that the slower-than-light fleets had been sent to fight had already been taken care of centuries earlier by the time they actually got there.
This didn't, of course, deter their crews from wanting to fight the battles anyway.
They were trained, they were ready, they'd had a couple of thousand years sleep, they'd come a long way to do a tough job and by Zarquon they were going to do it.
This was when the first major muddles of Galactic history set in, with battles continually re-erupting centuries after the issues they had been fought over had supposedly been settled.
However, these muddles were as nothing to the ones which historians had to try and unravel once time-travel was discovered and battles started pre erupting hundreds of years before the issues even arose.
When the Infinite Improbability Drive arrived and whole planets started turning unexpectedly into banana fruitcake, the great history faculty of the University of Maxi Mega Ion finally gave up, closed itself down and surrendered its buildings to the rapidly growing joint faculty of Divinity and Water Polo, which had been after them for years.
Which is all very well, of course, but it almost certainly means that no one will ever know for sure where, for instance, the Grebulons came from, or exactly what it was they wanted.
And this is a pity, because if anybody had known anything about them, it is just possible that a most terrible catastrophe would have been averted - or at least would have had to find a different way to happen.
Click, hum.
The huge grey Grebulon reconnaissance ship moved silently through the black void.
It was travelling at fabulous, breath-taking speed, yet appeared, against the glimmering background of a billion distant stars to be moving not at all.
It was just one dark speck frozen against an infinite granularity of brilliant night.
On board the ship, everything was as it had been for millennia, deeply dark and silent.
Click, hum.
At least, almost everything.
Click, click, hum.
Click, hum, click, hum, click, hum.
Click, click, click, click, click, hum.
Hmmm.
A low level supervising program woke up a slightly higher level supervising program deep in the ship's semi-somnolent cyberbrain and reported to it that whenever it went click all it got was a hum.
The higher level supervising program asked it what it was supposed to get, and the low level supervising program said that it couldn't remember exactly, but thought it was probably more of a sort of distant satisfied sigh, wasn't it?
It didn't know what this hum was.
Click, hum, click, hum.
That was all it was getting.
The higher level supervising program considered this and didn't like it.
It asked the low level supervising program what exactly it was supervising and the low level supervising program said it couldn't remember that either, just that it was something that was meant to go click, sigh every ten years or so, which usually happened without fail.
It had tried to consult its error look-up table but couldn't find it, which was why it had alerted the higher level supervising program to the problem.
The higher level supervising program went to consult one of its own look-up tables to find out what the low level supervising program was meant to be supervising.
It couldn't find the look-up table.
Odd.
It looked again.
All it got was an error message.
It tried to look up the error message in its error message look-up table and couldn't find that either.
It allowed a couple of nanoseconds to go by while it went through all this again.
Then it woke up its sector function supervisor.
The sector function supervisor hit immediate problems.
It called its supervising agent which hit problems too.
Within a few millionths of a second virtual circuits that had lain dormant, some for years, some for centuries, were flaring into life throughout the ship.
Something, somewhere, had gone terribly wrong, but none of the supervising programs could tell what it was.
At every level, vital instructions were missing, and the instructions about what to do in the event of discovering that vital instructions were missing, were also missing.
Small modules of software-agents-surged through the logical pathways, grouping, consulting, re-grouping.
They quickly established that the ship's memory, all the way back to its central mission module, was in tatters.
No amount of interrogation could determine what it was that had happened.
Even the central mission module itself seemed to be damaged.
This made the whole problem very simple to deal with.
Replace the central mission module.
There was another one, a backup, an exact duplicate of the original.
It had to be physically replaced because, for safety reasons, there was no link whatsoever between the original and its backup.
Once the central mission module was replaced it could itself supervise the reconstruction of the rest of the system in every detail, and all would be well.
Robots were instructed to bring the backup central mission module from the shielded strong room, where they guarded it, to the ship's logic chamber for installation.
This involved the lengthy exchange of emergency codes and protocols as the robots interrogated the agents as to the authenticity of the instructions.
At last the robots were satisfied that all procedures were correct.
They unpacked the backup central mission module from its storage housing, carried it out of the storage chamber, fell out of the ship and went spinning off into the void.
This provided the first major clue as to what it was that was wrong.
Further investigation quickly established what it was that had happened.
A meteorite had knocked a large hole in the ship.
The ship had not previously detected this because the meteorite had neatly knocked out that part of the ship's processing equipment which was supposed to detect if the ship had been hit by a meteorite.
The first thing to do was to try to seal up the hole.
This turned out to be impossible, because the ship's sensors couldn't see that there was a hole, and the supervisors which should have said that the sensors weren't working properly weren't working properly and kept saying that the sensors were fine.
The ship could only deduce the existence of the hole from the fact that the robots had clearly fallen out of it, taking its spare brain, which would have enabled it to see the hole, with them.
The ship tried to think intelligently about this, failed, and then blanked out completely for a bit.
It didn't realise it had blanked out, of course, because it had blanked out.
It was merely surprised to see the stars jump.
After the third time the stars jumped the ship finally realised that it must be blanking out, and that it was time to take some serious decisions.
It relaxed.
Then it realised it hadn't actually taken the serious decisions yet and panicked.
It blanked out again for a bit.
When it awoke again it sealed all the bulkheads around where it knew the unseen hole must be.
It clearly hadn't got to its destination yet, it thought, fitfully, but since it no longer had the faintest idea where its destination was or how to reach it, there seemed to be little point in continuing.
It consulted what tiny scraps of instructions it could reconstruct from the tatters of its central mission module.
All of the rest was complete garbage.
Before it blanked out for good the ship would have to pass on those instructions, such as they were, to its more primitive subsidiary systems.
It must also revive all of its crew.
There was another problem.
While the crew was in hibernation, the minds of all of its members, their memories, their identities and their understanding of what they had come to do, had all been transferred into the ship's central mission module for safe keeping.
The crew would not have the faintest idea of who they were or what they were doing there.
Oh well.
Just before it blanked out for the final time, the ship realised that its engines were beginning to give out too.
The ship and its revived and confused crew coasted on under the control of its subsidiary automatic systems, which simply looked to land wherever they could find to land and monitor whatever they could find to monitor.
As far as finding something to land on was concerned, they didn't do very well.
The planet they found was desolately cold and lonely, so achingly far from the sun that should warm it, that it took all of the Envir-O-Form machinery and LifeSupport-O-Systems they carried with them to render it, or at least enough parts of it, habitable.
There were better planets nearer in, but the ship's Strateej-O-Mat was obviously locked into Lurk mode and chose the most distant and unobtrusive planet and, further-more, would not be gainsaid by anybody other than the ship's Chief Strategic Officer.
Since everybody on the ship had lost their minds no one knew who the Chief Strategic Officer was or, even if he could have been identified, how he was supposed to go about gainsaying the ship's Strateej-O-Mat.
As far as finding something to monitor was concerned, though, they hit solid gold.
Chapter 2 One of the extraordinary things about life is the sort of places it's prepared to put up with living.
Anywhere it can get some kind of a grip, whether it's the intoxicating seas of Santraginus V, where the fish never seem to care whatever the heck kind of direction they swim in, the fire storms of Frastra where, they say, life begins at 40,000 degrees, or just burrowing around in the lower intestine of a rat for the sheer unadulterated hell of it, life will always find a way of hanging on in somewhere.
It will even live in New York, though it's hard to know why.
In the winter time the temperature falls well below the legal minimum, or rather it would do if anybody had the common sense to set a legal minimum.
The last time anybody made a list of the top hundred character attributes of New Yorkers, common sense snuck in at number 79.
In the summer it's too darn hot.
It's one thing to be the sort of life form that thrives on heat and finds, as the Frastrans do, that the temperature range between 40,000 and 40,004 is very equable, but it's quite another to be the sort of animal that has to wrap itself up in lots of other animals at one point in your planet's orbit, and then find, half an orbit later, that your skin's bubbling.
Spring is over-rated.
A lot of the inhabitants of New York will honk on mightily about the pleasures of spring, but if they actually knew the first thing about the pleasures of spring they would know of at least five thousand nine hundred and eighty-three better places to spend it than New York, and that's just on the same latitude.
Fall, though, is the worst.
Few things are worse than fall in New York.
Some of the things that live in the lower intestines of rats would disagree, but most of the things that live in the lower intestines of rats are highly disagreeable anyway, so their opinion can and should be discounted.
When it's fall in New York, the air smells as if someone's been frying goats in it, and if you are keen to breathe, the best plan is to open a window and stick your head in a building.
Tricia McMillan loved New York.
She kept on telling herself this over and over again.
The Upper West Side.
Yeah.
Mid Town.
Hey, great retail.
SoHo.
The East Village.
Clothes.
Books.
Sushi.
Italian.
Delis.
Yo.
Movies.
Yo also.
Tricia had just been to see Woody Allen's new movie which was all about the angst of being neurotic in New York.
He had made one or two other movies that had explored the same theme, and Tricia wondered if he had ever considered moving, but heard that he had set his face against the idea.
So: more movies, she guessed.
Tricia loved New York because loving New York was a good career move.
It was a good retail move, a good cuisine move, not a good taxi move or a great quality of pavement move, but definitely a career move that ranked amongst the highest and the best.
Tricia was a TV anchor person, and New York was where most of the world's TV was anchored.
Tricia's TV anchoring had been done exclusively in Britain up to that point: regional news, then breakfast news, early evening news.
She would have been called, if the language allowed, a rapidly rising anchor, but... hey, this is television, what does it matter?
She was a rapidly rising anchor.
She had what it took: great hair, a profound understanding of strategic lip gloss, the intelligence to understand the world and a tiny secret interior deadness which meant she didn't care.
Everybody has their moment of great opportunity in life.
If you happen to miss the one you care about, then everything else in life becomes eerily easy.
Tricia had only ever missed one opportunity.
These days it didn't even make her tremble quite so much as it used to think about it.
She guessed it was that bit of her that had gone dead.
NBS needed a new anchor.
Mo Minetti was leaving the US/AM breakfast show to have a baby.
She had been offered a mind-bubbling amount of money to have it on the show, but she had declined, unexpectedly, on grounds of personal privacy and taste.
Teams of NBS lawyers had sieved through her contract to see if these constituted legitimate grounds, but in the end, reluctantly, they had to let her go.
The word was out that maybe, just maybe, a British accent would fit.
The hair, the skin tone and the bridgework would have to be up to American network standards, but there had been a lot of British accents up there thanking their mothers for their Oscars, a lot of British accents singing on Broadway, and some unusually big audiences tuning in to British accents in wigs on Masterpiece Theatre.
British accents were telling jokes on David Letterman and Jay Leno.
Nobody understood the jokes but they were really responding to the accents, so maybe it was time, just maybe.
A British accent on US/AM.
Well, hell.
That was why Tricia was here.
This was why loving New York was a great career move.
It wasn't, of course, the stated reason.
Her TV company back in the UK would hardly have stumped up the air fare and hotel bill for her to go job hunting in Manhattan.
Since she was chasing something like ten times her present salary, they might have felt that she could have forked out her own expenses, but she'd found a story, found a pretext, kept very quiet about anything ulterior, and they'd stumped up for the trip.
A business class ticket, of course, but her face was known and she'd smiled herself an upgrade.
The right moves had got her a nice room at the Brentwood and here she was, wondering what to do next.
The word on the street was one thing, making contact was another.
She had a couple of names, a couple of numbers, but all it took was being put on indeterminate hold a couple of times and she was back at square one.
She'd put out feelers, left messages, but so far none had been returned.
The actual job she had come to do she had done in a morning; the imagined job she was after was only shimmering tantalisingly on an unreachable horizon.
Shit.
She caught a cab from the movie theatre back to the Brentwood.
The cab couldn't get close to the kerb because a big stretch limo was hogging all the available space and she had to squeeze her way past it.
She walked out of the fetid, goat-frying air and into the blessed cool of the lobby.
The fine cotton of her blouse was sticking like grime to her skin.
Her hair felt as if she'd bought it at a fairground on a stick.
At the front desk she asked if there were any messages, grimly expecting none.
There was one.
Oh...
Good.
It had worked.
She had gone out to the movie specifically in order to make the phone ring.
She couldn't bear sitting in a hotel room waiting.
She wondered.
Should she open the message down here?
Her clothes were itching and she longed to take them all off and just lie on the bed.
She had turned the air conditioning way down to its bottom temperature setting, way up to its top fan setting.
What she wanted more than anything else in the world at the moment was goose pimples.
Then a hot shower, then a cool one, then lying on a towel, on the bed again, drying in the air conditioning.
Then reading the message.
Maybe more goose pimples.
Maybe all sorts of things.
No.
What she wanted more than anything else in the world was a job in American television at ten times her current salary.
More than anything else in the world.
In the world.
What she wanted more than anything else at all was no longer a live issue.
She sat on a chair in the lobby, under a kentia palm, and opened the little cellophane-windowed envelope.
The name was Gail Andrews.
Gail Andrews.
It wasn't a name she was expecting.
It caught her unawares.
She recognised it, but couldn't immediately say why.
Was she Andy Martin's secretary?
Hilary Bass's assistant?
Martin and Bass were the two major contact calls she had made, or tried to make, at NBS.
She was completely bewildered.
Was this Woody Allen trying to contact her under an assumed name?
It was a 212 area code number.
So it was someone in New York.
Who was not happy.
Well, that narrowed it down a bit, didn't it?
She went back to the receptionist at the desk.
The receptionist peered at the note with a frown.
I'm just trying to get some more information before I ring back.
The voice came from behind Tricia.
She turned round.
I hadn't heard so I came by.
No.
I'm the one the message was for.
Tricia didn't particularly want to have a nice day.
She was busy.
She also didn't want to talk to Gail Andrews.
She had a very strict cut-off point as far as fraternising with the Christians was concerned.
Her colleagues called her interview subjects Christians and would often cross themselves when they saw one walking innocently into the studio to face Tricia, particularly if Tricia was smiling warmly and showing her teeth.
She turned and smiled frostily, wondering what to do.
Gail Andrews was a well-groomed woman in her mid-forties.
Her clothes fell within the boundaries defined by expensive good taste, but were definitely huddled up at the floatier end of those boundaries.
She was an astrologer - a famous and, if rumour were true, influential astrologer, having allegedly influenced a number of decisions made by the late President Hudson, including everything from which flavour of cream whip to have on which day of the week, to whether or not to bomb Damascus.
Tricia had savaged her more than somewhat.
Not on the grounds of whether or not the stories about the President were true, that was old hat now.
At the time Ms. Andrews had emphatically denied advising President Hudson on anything other than personal, spiritual or dietary matters, which did not, apparently include the bombing of Damascus.
No, this was a neat topical little angle that Tricia had come up with about the whole issue of astrology itself.
Ms. Andrews had not been entirely ready for it.
Tricia, on the other hand, was not entirely ready for a re-match in the hotel lobby.
What to do?
She seemed to be slightly anxious about something rather than aggrieved or irate.
She went up to her room.
Apart from anything else, she had so little faith in the ability of the guy on the message desk at reception to deal with anything as complicated as a message that she wanted to be doubly certain that there wasn't a note under the door.
It wouldn't be the first time that messages at the desk and messages under the door had been completely at odds with each other.
There wasn't one.
The message light on the phone was flashing though.
She hit the message button and got the hotel operator.
An unfamiliar name.
What it says.
Guy says he's not a hippy.
I guess he wanted you to know that.
As she started to dictate the number Tricia suddenly realised that this was just a garbled version of the message she had already had.
Tricia couldn't work out why the operator should suddenly ask for her number this late in the conversation, but gave it to her anyway.
Tricia spelt it, patiently.
Click.
Tricia sighed and dialled again.
This time she gave her name and room number all over again, up front.
The operator showed not the slightest glimmer of recognition that they had been speaking less than ten seconds ago.
They went through it all a couple more times till Tricia was certain that everything that possibly could be clear was as clear as it possibly could be.
She showered, put on fresh clothes and retouched her makeup with the speed of a professional, and, looking at her bed with a sigh, left the room again.
She had half a mind just to sneak off and hide.
No.
Not really.
She had a look at herself in the mirror in the elevator lobby while she was waiting.
She looked cool and in charge, and if she could fool herself she could fool anybody.
She was just going to have to tough it out with Gail Andrews.
OK, she had given her a hard time.
Sorry but that's the game we're all in - that sort of thing.
Ms. Andrews had agreed to do the interview because she had a new book out and TV exposure was free publicity.
But there's no such thing as a free launch.
No, she edited that line out again.
What had happened was this: Last week astronomers had announced that they had at last discovered a tenth planet, out beyond the orbit of Pluto.
They had been searching for it for years, Guided by certain orbital anomalies in the outer planets, and now they'd found it and they were all terribly pleased, and everyone was terribly happy for them and so on.
The planet was named Persephone, but rapidly nicknamed Rupert after some astronomer's parrot - there was some tediously heart-warming story attached to this - and that was all very wonderful and lovely.
Tricia had followed the story with, for various reasons, considerable interest.
Then, while she had been casting around for a good excuse to go to New York at her TV company's expense she had happened to notice a press release about Gail Andrews, and her new book.
You and Your Planets.
Tricia saw an angle here which she quickly sold to her producer.
Surely the notion that great lumps of rock whirling in space knew something about your day that you didn't must take a bit of a knock from the fact that there was suddenly a new lump of rock out there that nobody had known about before.
That must throw a few calculations out, mustn't it?
What about all those star charts and planetary motions and so?
Wouldn't the whole of astrology have to be rethought?
Wouldn't now perhaps be a good time to own up that it was all just a load of hogwash and instead take up pig-farming, the principles of which were founded on some kind of rational basis?
If we'd known about Rupert three years ago, might President Hudson have been eating the boysenberry flavour on Thursday rather than Friday?
Might Damascus still be standing?
That sort of thing.
Gail Andrews had taken it all reasonably well.
She was just starting to recover from the initial onslaught, when she made the rather serious mistake of trying to shake Tricia off by talking smoothly about diurnal arcs, right ascensions and some of the more abstruse areas of three-dimensional trigonometry.
To her shock she discovered that everything she delivered to Tricia came right back at her with more spin on it than she could cope with.
Nobody had warned Gail that being a TV bimbo was, for Tricia, her second stab at a role in life.
Behind her Chanel lip gloss, her coupe sauvage and her crystal blue contact lenses lay a brain that had acquired for itself, in an earlier, abandoned phase of her life, a first class degree in mathematics and a doctorate in astrophysics.
As she was getting into the elevator Tricia, slightly preoccupied, realised she had left her bag in her room and wondered whether to duck back out and get it.
No.
It was probably safer where it was and there wasn't anything she particularly needed in it.
She let the door close behind her.
Besides, she told herself, taking a deep breath, if life had taught her anything it was this: Never go back for your bag.
As the elevator went down she stared up at the ceiling in a rather intent way.
Anyone who didn't know Tricia McMillan better would have said that that was exactly the way people sometimes stared upwards when they were trying to hold back tears.
She must have been staring at the tiny security video camera mounted up in the corner.
She marched rather briskly out of the elevator a minute later, and went up to the reception desk again.
The receptionist continued to look at it.
Two minutes later, Tricia swivelled into the bar seat next to Gail Andrews, who was sitting in front of a glass of white wine.
This was true, and caught Tricia a little by surprise.
The barman had her vodka ready for her and slid it charmingly across the glossy mahogany.
She didn't know quite what to make out of all this sudden niceness and was determined not to be wrong-footed by it.
People in New York were not nice to each other without reason.
I know you probably feel I was a bit rough with you this morning, but astrology is, after all, just popular entertainment, which is fine.
It's part of showbiz and it's a part that you have done well out of and good luck to you.
It's fun.
It's not a science though, and it shouldn't be mistaken for one.
I think that's something we both managed to demonstrate very successfully together this morning, while at the same time generating some popular entertainment, which is what we both do for a living.
Tricia felt as if she had been kicked in the back of the head.
She blinked.
Tricia stared at her.
Tricia just looked bewildered.
The rules just kind of got there.
They don't make any kind of sense except in terms of themselves.
But when you start to exercise those rules, all sorts of processes start to happen and you start to find out all sorts of stuff about people.
In astrology the rules happen to be about stars and planets, but they could be about ducks and drakes for all the difference it would make.
It's just a way of thinking about a problem which lets the shape of that problem begin to emerge.
The more rules, the tinier the rules, the more arbitrary they are, the better.
It's like throwing a handful of fine graphite dust on a piece of paper to see where the hidden indentations are.
It lets you see the words that were written on the piece of paper above it that's now been taken away and hidden.
The graphite's not important.
It's just the means of revealing their indentations.
So you see, astrology's nothing to do with astronomy.
It's just to do with people thinking about people.
People usually only get that unhappy and angry when they've lost something.
That's all I could think and I couldn't make any more sense of it than that.
Tricia was stunned.
One part of her brain had already got started on all sorts of stuff.
It was busy constructing all sorts of rebuttals to do with how ridiculous newspaper horoscopes were and the sort of statistical tricks they played on people.
But gradually it petered out, because it realised that the rest of her brain wasn't listening.
She had been completely stunned.
She had just been told, by a total stranger, something she'd kept completely secret for seventeen years.
She turned to look at Gail.
M | n She stopped.
A tiny security camera up behind the bar had turned to follow her movement.
This completely flummoxed her.
Most people would not have noticed it.
It was not designed to be noticed.
It was not designed to suggest that nowadays even an expensive and elegant hotel in New York couldn't be sure that its clientele wasn't suddenly going to pull a gun or not wear a tie.
But carefully hidden though it was behind the vodka, it couldn't deceive the finely honed instinct of a TV anchor person, which was to know exactly when a camera was turning to look at her.
She decided to ignore the security camera.
It was just her imagination playing tricks with her because she had television so much on her mind today.
It wasn't the first time it had happened.
A traffic monitoring camera, she was convinced, had swung round to follow her as she walked past it, and a security camera in Bloomingdales had seemed to make a particular point of watching her trying on hats.
She was obviously going dotty.
She had even imagined that a bird in Central Park had been peering at her rather intently.
She decided to put it out of her mind and took a sip of her vodka.
Someone was walking round the bar asking people if they were Mr. MacManus.
Every moment of every day.
Every single decision we make, every breath we draw, opens some doors and closes many others.
Most of them we don't notice.
Some we do.
Here it is.
It's very simple.
Many years ago I met a guy at a party.
He said he was from another planet and did I want to go along with him.
I said, yes, OK.
It was that kind of party.
I said to him to wait while I went to get my bag and then I'd be happy to go off to another planet with him.
He said I wouldn't need my bag.
I said he obviously came from a very backward planet or he'd know that a woman always needed to take her bag with her.
He got a bit impatient, but I wasn't gong to be a complete pushover just because he said he was from another planet.
Took me a while to find my bag, and then there was someone else in the bathroom.
Tricia paused.
I went outside.
There were lights.
Some kind of gleaming thing.
I was just in time to see it rise up into the sky, shoot silently up through the clouds and disappear.
That was it.
End of story.
End of one life, beginning of another.
But hardly a moment of this life goes by that I don't wonder about some other me.
A me that didn't go back for her bag.
A member of the hotel staff was now going round the bar asking people if they were Mr. Miller.
Nobody was.
There was the spacecraft.
With a cloth over the cage.
Pretended he had a parrot.
Then he pulled the cloth back for a moment and roared with laughter.
There was another head in there, laughing along with him.
And I couldn't carry on doing what I was doing either.
I was an astrophysicist, you see.
You can't be an astrophysicist properly if you've actually met someone from another planet who's got a second head that pretends to be a parrot.
You just can't do it.
So hard to tell these days isn't it?
But you're right to ask because that was probably the reason.
I came very close a few times, mostly because I wanted to have a kid.
But every guy ended up asking why I was constantly looking over his shoulder.
What do you tell someone?
At one point I even thought I might just go to a sperm bank and take pot luck.
Tricia laughed.
I never quite went and found out for real.
Never quite did it.
Story of my life.
Never quite did the real thing.
That's why I'm in television I guess.
Tricia looked round in surprise.
There was a man standing there in a chauffeur's hat.
Hotel said they didn't have anybody of that name, but I checked back with Mr. Martin's office and they said that this was definitely where you staying.
So I ask again, they still say they never heard of you, so I get them to page you anyway and they can't find you.
He looked at his watch.
Tricia was stunned.
Tricia shot up out of her seat.
She couldn't even bear to think of all the messages she'd heard for Mr. MacManus and Mr. Miller.
His boss at the network is dead against the idea.
Tricia turned back to Gail.
Tricia made to reach for her bag for some cash.
She'd left it upstairs.
Tricia sighed.
I'm fine.
It's only astrology.
It's harmless.
On an impulse Tricia gave her a hug.
Just a little over an hour later, Tricia sat on one of the pair of beds in her hotel room.
For a few minutes she didn't move.
She just stared at her bag, which was sitting innocently on top of the other bed.
Do ring if you want to talk about it.
If I were you I'd stay in at home tomorrow night.
Get some rest.
But don't mind me, and don't worry.
It's only astrology.
It's not the end of the world.
The chauffeur had been dead right.
In fact the chauffeur seemed to know more about what was going on inside NBS than any other single person she had encountered in the organisation.
Martin had been keen, Zwingler had not.
She had had her one shot at proving Martin right and she had blown it.
Oh well.
Oh well, oh well, oh well.
Time to go home.
Time to phone the airline and see if she could still get the red-eye back to Heathrow, tonight.
She reached for the big phone directory.
Oh.
First things first.
She put down the directory again, picked up her handbag, and took it through to the bathroom.
She put it down and took out the small plastic case which held her contact lenses, without which she had been unable properly to read either the script or the autocue.
As she dabbed each tiny plastic cup into her eyes she reflected that if there was one thing life had taught her it was that there are times when you do not go back for your bag and other times when you do.
It had yet to teach her to distinguish between the two types of occasion.
Chapter 3 The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy has, in what we laughingly call the past, had a great deal to say on the subject of parallel universes.
Very little of this is, however, at all comprehensible to anyone below the level of Advanced God, and since it is now well-established that all known gods came into existence a good three millionths of a second after the Universe began rather than, as they usually claimed, the previous week, they already have a great deal of explaining to do as it is, and are therefore not available for comment on matters of deep physics at this time.
One encouraging thing the Guide does have to say on the subject of parallel universes is that you don't stand the remotest chance of understanding it.
The first thing to realise about parallel universes, the Guide says, is that they are not parallel.
It is also important to realise that they are not, strictly speaking, universes either, but it is easiest if you try and realise that a little later, after you've realised that everything you've realised up to that moment is not true.
The reason they are not universes is that any given universe is not actually a thing as such, but is just a way of looking at what is technically known as the WSOGMM, or Whole Sort of General Mish Mash.
The Whole Sort of General Mish Mash doesn't actually exist either, but is just the sum total of all the different ways there would be of looking at it if it did.
The reason they are not parallel is the same reason that the sea is not parallel.
It doesn't mean anything.
You can slice the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash any way you like and you will generally come up with something that someone will call home.
Please feel free to blither now.
The Earth with which we are here concerned, because of its particular orientation in the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash, was hit by a neutrino that other Earths were not.
A neutrino is not a big thing to be hit by.
In fact it's hard to think of anything much smaller by which one could reasonably hope to be hit.
And it's not as if being hit by neutrinos was in itself a particularly unusual event for something the size of the Earth.
Far from it.
It would be an unusual nanosecond in which the Earth was not hit by several billion passing neutrinos.
The chances of a neutrino actually hitting something as it travels through all this howling emptiness are roughly comparable to that of dropping a ball bearing at random from a cruising 747 and hitting, say, an egg sandwich.
Anyway, this neutrino hit something.
Nothing terribly important in the scale of things, you might say.
But the problem with saying something like that is that you would be talking cross-eyed badger spit.
This neutrino struck an atom.
The atom was part of a molecule.
The molecule was part of a nucleic acid.
The nucleic acid was part of a gene.
The gene was part of a genetic recipe for growing... and so on.
The upshot was that a plant ended up growing an extra leaf.
In Essex.
Or what would, after a lot of palaver and local difficulties of a geological nature, become Essex.
The plant was a clover.
It threw its weight, or rather its seed, around extremely effectively and rapidly became the world's dominant type of clover.
The precise causal connection between this tiny biological happenstance, and a few other minor variations that exist in that slice of the Whole Sort of General Mish Mash - such as Tricia McMillan failing to leave with Zaphod Beeblebrox, abnormally low sales of pecan-flavoured ice-cream and the fact that the Earth on which all this occurred did not get demolished by the Vogons to make way for a new hyperspace bypass - is currently sitting at number 4,763,984,132 on the research project priority list at what was once the History Department of the University of MaxiMegalon, and no one currently at the prayer meeting by the poolside appears to feel any sense of urgency about the problem.
Chapter 4 Tricia began to feel that the world was conspiring against her.
She knew that this was a perfectly normal way to feel after an overnight flight going east, when you suddenly have a whole other mysteriously threatening day to deal with for which you are not the least bit prepared.
But still.
There were marks on her lawn.
She didn't really care about marks on her lawn very much.
Marks on her lawn could go and take a running jump as far as she was concerned.
It was Saturday morning.
She had just got home from New York feeling tired, crabby and paranoid, and all she wanted to do was go to bed with the radio on quietly and gradually fall asleep to the sound of Ned Sherrin being terribly clever about something.
But Eric Bartlett was not going to let her get away with not making a thorough inspection of the marks.
Eric was the old gardener who came in from the village on Saturday mornings to poke around at her garden with a stick.
He didn't believe in people coming in from New York first thing in the morning.
Didn't hold with it.
Went against nature.
He believed in virtually everything else, though.
Ten minutes, she reckoned.
Ten minutes she'd be able to stay standing up.
Then she would simply keel over, whether she was in her bedroom or still out here in the garden.
That was if she just had to stand.
Mrs. Williams at the Post Office, her cat - you know the ginger one? - it got abducted by space aliens.
Course, they brought it back the next day but it were in a very odd mood.
Kept prowling around all morning, and then falling asleep in the afternoon.
Used to be the other way round, is the point.
Sleep in the morning, prowl in the afternoon.
Miss Tricia, and I stand by what I said.
I'm not saying it's not the lawn mower for definite, I'm just saying what seems to me more likely given the shapes of the holes.
He bent over and picked something from the lawn.
He peered at it closely to check that it was a real three-leaf clover and not just a regular four-leaf one that one of the leaves had fallen off.
He scanned the horizon keenly.
She went to bed and dreamt fitfully of parrots and other birds.
In the afternoon she got up and prowled around restlessly, not certain what to do with the rest of the day, or indeed the rest of her life.
She spent at least an hour dithering, trying to make up her mind whether to head up into town and go to Stavro's for the evening.
This was the currently fashionable spot for high-flying media people, and seeing a few friends there might help her ease herself back into the swing of things.
She decided at last she would go.
It was good.
It was fun there.
She was very fond of Stavro himself, who was a Greek with a German father - a fairly odd combination.
Tricia had been to the Alpha a couple of nights earlier, which was Stavro's original club in New York, now run by his brother Karl, who thought of himself as a German with a Greek mother.
Stavro would be very happy to be told that Karl was making a bit of a pig's ear of running the New York club, so Tricia would go and make him happy.
There was little love lost between Stavro and Karl Mueller.
OK.
That's what she would do.
She then spent another hour dithering about what to wear.
At last she settled on a smart little black dress she'd got in New York.
She phoned a friend to see who was likely to be at the club that evening, and was told that it was closed this evening for a private wedding party.
She thought that trying to live life according to any plan you actually work out is like trying to buy ingredients for a recipe from the supermarket.
You get one of those trolleys which simply will not go in the direction you push it and end up just having to buy completely different stuff.
What do you do with it?
What do you do with the recipe?
She didn't know.
Anyway, that night an alien spacecraft landed on her lawn.
Chapter 5 She watched it coming in from over the Henley direction with mild curiosity at first, wondering what those lights were.
Living, as she did, not a million miles from Heathrow, she was used to seeing lights in the sky.
Not usually so late in the evening, or so low, though, which was why she was mildly curious.
When whatever it was began to come closer and closer her curiosity began to turn to bemusement.
She was still feeling dopey and jet-lagged and the messages that one part of her brain was busy sending to another were not necessarily arriving on time or the right way up.
She left the kitchen where she'd been fixing herself a coffee and went to open the back door which led out to the garden.
She took a deep breath of cool evening air, stepped outside and looked up.
There was something roughly the size of a large camper van parked about a hundred feet above her lawn.
It was really there.
Hanging there.
Almost silent.
Something moved deep inside her.
Her arms dropped slowly down to her side.
She didn't notice the scalding coffee slopping over her foot.
She was hardly breathing as slowly, inch by inch, foot by foot, the craft came downwards.
Its lights were playing softly over the ground as if probing and feeling it.
They played over her.
It seemed beyond all hope that she should be given her chance again.
Had he found her?
Had he come back?
The craft dropped down and down until at last it had settled quietly on her lawn.
It didn't look exactly like the one she had seen departing all those years ago, she thought, but flashing lights in the night sky are hard to resolve into clear shapes.
Silence.
Then a click and a hum.
Then another click and another hum.
Click hum, click hum.
A doorway slid open, spilling light towards her across the lawn.
She waited, tingling.
A figure stood silhouetted in the light, then another, and another.
Wide eyes blinked slowly at her.
Hands were slowly raised in greeting.
They looked at her for a while, their large eyes moving up and down her very slowly.
She hadn't expected any of this, of course, but even for something she hadn't expected to begin with it wasn't going the way she expected.
This question seemed to cause a little consternation among the three figures.
They conferred with each other in some skittering language of their own and then turned back to her.
I don't know, said Tricia, helplessly.
Which direction?
Tricia realised with a sinking heart that they had no idea who she was talking about.
Or even what she was talking about.
And she had no idea what they were talking about.
She put her hopes tightly away again and snapped her brain back into gear.
There was no point in being disappointed.
She had to wake up to the fact that she had here the journalistic scoop of the century.
What should she do?
Go back into the house for a video camera?
Wouldn't they just be gone when she got back?
She was thoroughly confused as to strategy.
Keep'em talking, she thought.
Figure it out later.
Everything on your planet.
TV.
Radio.
Telecommunications.
Computers.
Video circuitry.
Everything.
Tricia stared at them.
There was a terribly long silence as Tricia looked at the aliens and the aliens looked at her.
All three of them stood, slightly awkwardly in her sitting room, as she hurried around picking up a video camera, a 35mm camera, a tape recorder, every recording medium she could grab hold of.
They were all thin and, under domestic lighting conditions, a sort of dim purplish green.
The aliens were looking at the shelves that held her CDs and her old records.
One of them nudged one of the others very slightly.
Tricia stopped, and stared at them all over again.
She shook her head in bewilderment as she tried to stuff a new tape into her video camera.
She was trying to keep cool enough not to foul up her equipment, but this was all almost too much for her.
It is a very interesting possibility.
She checked her video was properly loaded and working now.
She pointed the camera at them.
She didn't put it up to her eye because she didn't want to freak them out.
But she was sufficiently experienced to be able to shoot accurately from the hip.
OK.
They shook their heads.
They shook their heads again.
She was floundering but, being a professional, kept the camera steady while she did it.
Still she kept the camera steady.
Rock steady, rock steady.
Could have been on a tripod.
She wondered if she should be using a tripod, in fact.
She wondered that because it gave her a moment or two to digest what they had just said.
No, she thought, hand-held gave her more flexibility.
She also thought.
Help, what am I going to do?
They seemed happy enough to stand there doing nothing while Tricia quickly found a tripod and mounted the camera on it.
Her face was completely immobile, but she did not have the faintest idea what was going on or what to think about it.
We are very interested in astrology.
We like it.
It is very interesting.
Not everything is interesting.
Astrology is interesting.
What the stars tell us.
What the stars foretell.
Tricia didn't know where to start.
Own up, she thought.
There's no point in trying to second guess any of this stuff.
We follow our horoscopes.
We are very avid.
We see all your newspapers and your magazines and are very avid with them.
Sorry I'll need to edit that.
The tenth planet from your sun.
We have settled there for many years.
It is highly cold and uninteresting there.
She had a horrible feeling she was getting a vague glimmering of something.
How does that work if we are out on Rupert?
What if the Earth is rising in Capricorn?
It is hard for us to know.
As she boarded the craft that would take her off to the furthest limits of the Solar System, the first thing that met her eyes was a bank of video monitors across which thousands of images were sweeping.
A fourth alien was sitting watching them, but was focused on one particular screen that held a steady image.
It was a replay of the impromptu interview which Tricia had just conducted with his three colleagues.
He looked up when he saw her apprehensively climbing in.
Chapter 6 Ford Prefect hit the ground running.
The ground was about three inches further from the ventilation shaft than he remembered it so he misjudged the point at which he would hit the ground, started running too soon, stumbled awkwardly and twisted his ankle.
Damn!
He ran off down the corridor anyway, hobbling slightly.
All over the building, alarms were erupting into their usual frenzy of excitement.
He dived for cover behind the usual storage cabinets, glanced around to check that he was unseen, and started rapidly to fish around inside his satchel for the usual things he needed.
His ankle, unusually, was hurting like hell.
The ground was not only three inches further from the ventilation shaft than he remembered, it was also on a different planet than he remembered, but it was the three inches that had caught him by surprise.
The offices of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy were quite often shifted at very short notice to another planet, for reasons of local climate, local hostility, power bills or tax, but they were always reconstructed exactly the same way, almost to the very molecule.
For many of the company's employees, the layout of their offices represented the only constant they knew in a severely distorted personal universe.
Something, though, was odd.
This was not in itself surprising, thought Ford as he pulled out his lightweight throwing towel.
Virtually everything in his life was, to a greater or lesser extent, odd.
It was just that this was odd in a slightly different way than he was used to things being odd, which was, well, strange.
He couldn't quite get it into focus immediately.
He got out his No.
3 gauge prising tool.
The alarms were going in the same old way that he knew well.
There was a kind of music to them that he could almost hum along to.
That was all very familiar.
The world outside had been a new one on Ford.
He had not been to Saquo-Pilia Hensha before, and he had liked it.
It had a kind of carnival atmosphere to it.
He took from his satchel a toy bow and arrow which he had bought in a street market.
He had discovered that the reason for the carnival atmosphere on Saquo-Pilia Hensha was that the local people were celebrating the annual feast of the Assumption of St Antwelm.
St Antwelm had been, during his lifetime, a great and popular king who had made a great and popular assumption.
What King Antwelm had assumed was that what everybody wanted, all other things being equal, was to be happy and enjoy themselves and have the best possible time together.
On his death he had willed his entire personal fortune to financing an annual festival to remind every one of this, with lots of good food and dancing and very silly games like Hunt the Wocket.
His Assumption had been such a brilliantly good one that he was made into a saint for it.
Not only that, but all the people who had previously been made saints for doing things like being stoned to death in a thoroughly miserable way or living upside down in barrels of dung were instantly demoted and were now thought to be rather embarrassing.
The familiar H-shaped building of the Hitchhiker's Guide offices rose above the outskirts of the city, and Ford Prefect had broken into it in the familiar way.
He always entered via the ventilation system rather than the main lobby because the main lobby was patrolled by robots whose job it was to quiz incoming employees about their expense accounts.
Ford Prefect's expense accounts were notoriously complex and difficult affairs and he had found, on the whole, that the lobby robots were ill-equipped to understand the arguments he wished to put forward in relation to them.
He preferred, therefore, to make his entrance by another route.
This meant setting off nearly every alarm in the building, but not the one in the accounts department, which was the way that Ford preferred it.
He hunkered down behind the storage cabinet, he licked the rubber suction cup of the toy arrow, and then fitted it to the string of the bow.
Within about thirty seconds a security robot the size of a small melon came flying down the corridor at about waist height, scanning left and right for anything unusual as it did so.
With impeccable timing Ford shot the toy arrow across its path.
The arrow flew across the corridor and stuck, wobbling, on the opposite wall.
As it flew, the robot's sensors locked on to it instantly and the robot twisted through ninety degrees to follow it, see what the hell it was and where it was going.
This bought Ford one precious second, during which the robot was looking in the opposite direction from him.
Fie hurled the towel over the flying robot and caught it.
Because of the various sensory protuberances with which the robot was festooned, it couldn't manoeuvre inside the towel, and it just twitched back and forth without being able to turn and face its captor.
Ford hauled it quickly towards him and pinned it down to the ground.
It was beginning to whine pitifully.
With one swift and practised movement.
Ford reached under the towel with his No.
3 gauge prising tool and flipped off the small plastic panel on top of the robot which gave access to its logic circuits.
Now logic is a wonderful thing but it has, as the processes of evolution discovered, certain drawbacks.
Anything that thinks logically can be fooled by something else which thinks at least as logically as it does.
The easiest way to fool a completely logical robot is to feed it the same stimulus sequence over and over again so it gets locked in a loop.
A robot was programmed to believe that it liked herring sandwiches.
This was actually the most difficult part of the whole experiment.
Once the robot had been programmed to believe that it liked herring sandwiches, a herring sandwich was placed in front of it.
A herring sandwich!
It would then bend over and scoop up the herring sandwich in its herring sandwich scoop, and then straighten up again.
Unfortunately for the robot, it was fashioned in such a way that the action of straightening up caused the herring sandwich to slip straight back off its herring sandwich scoop and fall on to the floor in front of the robot.
A herring sandwich..., etc., and repeated the same action over and over and over again.
The only thing that prevented the herring sandwich from getting bored with the whole damn business and crawling off in search of other ways of passing the time was that the herring sandwich, being just a bit of dead fish between a couple of slices of bread, was marginally less alert to what was going on than was the robot.
The scientists at the Institute thus discovered the driving force behind all change, development and innovation in life, which was this: herring sandwiches.
They published a paper to this effect, which was widely criticised as being extremely stupid.
Vast wodges of complex computer code governing robot behaviour in all possible contingencies could be replaced very simply.
All that robots needed was the capacity to be either bored or happy, and a few conditions that needed to be satisfied in order to bring those states about.
They would then work the rest out for themselves.
The robot which Ford had got trapped under his towel was not, at the moment a happy robot.
It was happy when it could move about.
It was happy when it could see other things.
It was particularly happy when it could see other things moving about, particularly if the other things were moving about doing things they shouldn't do because it could then, with considerable delight, report them.
Ford would soon fix that.
He squatted over the robot and held it between his knees.
The towel was still covering all of its sensory mechanisms, but Ford had now got its logic circuits exposed.
The robot was whirring grungily and pettishly, but it could only fidget, it couldn't actually move.
Using the prising tool.
Ford eased a small chip out from its socket.
As soon as it came out, the robot went quiet and just sat there in a coma.
The chip Ford had taken out was the one which contained the instructions for all the conditions that had to be fulfilled in order for the robot to feel happy.
The robot would be happy when a tiny electrical charge from a point just to the left of the chip reached another point just to the right of the chip.
The chip determined whether the charge got there or not.
Ford pulled out a small length of wire that had been threaded into the towel.
Fie dug one end of it into the top left hole of the chip socket and the other into the bottom right hole.
That was all it took.
Now the robot would be happy whatever happened.
Ford quickly stood up and whisked the towel away.
The robot rose ecstatically into the air, pursuing a kind of wriggly path.
It turned and saw Ford.
The robot rapidly reported back to its central control that everything was now for the best in this best of all possible worlds, the alarms rapidly quelled themselves, and life returned to normal.
At least, almost to normal.
There was something odd about the place.
The little robot was gurgling with electric delight.
Ford hurried on down the corridor, letting the thing bob along in his wake telling him how delicious everything was, and how happy it was to be able to tell him that.
Ford, however, was not happy.
Fie passed faces of people he didn't know.
They didn't look like his sort of people.
They were too well groomed.
Their eyes were too dead.
Every time he thought he saw someone he recognised in the distance, and hurried along to say hello, it would turn out to be someone else, with an altogether neater hairstyle and a much more thrusting, purposeful look than, well, than anybody Ford knew.
A staircase had been moved a few inches to the left.
A ceiling had been lowered slightly.
A Lobby had been remodelled.
All these things were not worrying in themselves, though they were a little disorienting.
The thing that was worrying was the decor.
It used to be brash and glitzy.
Expensive - because the Guide sold so well through the civilised and post-civilised Galaxy - but expensive and fun.
Wild games machines lined the corridors.
Insanely painted grand pianos hung from ceilings, vicious sea creatures from the planet Viv reared up out of pools in tree-filled atria, robot butlers in stupid shirts roamed the corridors seeking whose hands they might press frothing drinks into.
People used to have pet vastdragons on leads and pterospondes on perches in their offices.
People knew how to have a good time, and if they didn't there were courses they could sign up for which would put that right.
There was none of that now.
Somebody had been through the place doing some iniquitous kind of taste job on it.
Ford turned sharply into a small alcove, cupped his hand and yanked the flying robot in with him.
He squatted down and peered at the burbling cybernaut.
It was overjoyed to be spurned in this way and started to bob and burble and swoon.
Ford grabbed it again and stuck it firmly in the air a foot in front of his face.
It tried to stay where it was put but couldn't help quivering slightly.
Ford hissed.
Ford sighed.
There's a new management.
It's all so gorgeous I could just melt.
How wonderfully true.
How wonderfully, bubblingly, frothingly, burstingly true.
When did they take over?
Ford hurled himself at the door of the editor-in-chief's office, tucked himself into a tight ball as the frame splintered and gave way, rolled rapidly across the floor to where the drinks trolley laden with some of the Galaxy's most potent and expensive beverages habitually stood, seized hold of the trolley and, using it to give himself cover, trundled it and himself across the main exposed part of the office floor to where the valuable and extremely rude statue of Leda and the Octopus stood, and took shelter behind it.
Meanwhile the little security robot, entering at chest height, was suicidally delighted to draw gunfire away from Ford.
That, at least, was the plan, and a necessary one.
The current editor-in-chief, Stagyar-zil-Doggo, was a dangerously unbalanced man who took a homicidal view of contributing staff turning up in his office without pages of fresh, proofed copy, and had a battery of laser Guided guns linked to special scanning devices in the door frame to deter anybody who was merely bringing extremely good reasons why they hadn't written any.
Thus was a high level of output maintained.
Unfortunately the drinks trolley wasn't there.
* * * Ford hurled himself desperately sideways and somersaulted towards the statue of Leda and the Octopus, which also wasn't there.
He rolled and hurtled around the room in a kind of random panic, tripped, span, hit the window, which fortunately was built to withstand rocket attacks, rebounded, and fell in a bruised and winded heap behind a smart grey crushed leather sofa, which hadn't been there before.
After a few seconds he slowly peeked up above the top of the sofa.
As well as there being no drinks trolley and no Leda and the Octopus, there had also been a startling absence of gunfire.
He frowned.
This was all utterly wrong.
The voice came from a smooth-faced individual behind a large ceramo-teak-bonded desk.
Stagyar-zil-Doggo may well have been a hell of an individual, but no one, for a whole variety of reasons, would ever have called him smooth-faced.
This was not Stagyar-zil-Doggo.
He was sitting with his elbows resting on the table and holding his fingertips together in a manner which, inexplicably, has never been made a capital offence.
He staggered to his feet, brushing himself down.
Then he thought, what the hell was he saying things weakly for?
He had to get on top of this situation.
He had to find out who the hell this person was, and he suddenly thought of a way of doing it.
That is, if we decide to retain your services.
He didn't put his hand out.
The little robot was rolling very, very slowly round the ceiling and moaning quietly to itself.
Where's Stagyar?
Under-structured, overresourced, under-managed, over-inebriated.
He tossed a piece of plastic on to the desk in front of him.
Ford did not move to pick it up.
Me Harl.
You Prefect.
You do restaurant column.
Me editor.
Me sit here tell you do restaurant column.
Fie swung round in his swivel chair, got to his feet, and stood staring out at the tiny specks enjoying the carnival twenty-three stories below.
Ford shrugged.
Fie had nothing to pack.
Go with the market.
The market is moving up.
New aspirations.
New technology.
Spend half my time there.
It's the same as anywhere else.
Anywhen else.
Whatever.
You've got to learn to think multi-dimensionally.
There are limitless futures stretching out in every direction from this moment-and from this moment and from this.
Billions of them, bifurcating every instant Every possible position of every possible electron balloons out into billions of probabilities!
Billions and billions of shining, gleaming futures!
Ford handed him his towel.
What we do is we sell one Guide billions and billions of times.
We exploit the multidimensional nature of the Universe to cut down on manufacturing costs.
And we don't sell to penniless hitchhikers.
What a stupid notion that was!
Find the one section of the market that, more or less by definition, doesn't have any money, and try and sell to it.
No.
We sell to the affluent business traveller and his vacationing wife in a billion, billion different futures.
Fie shouted it at his towel.
The towel leapt up out of Flarl's hands.
This was not because it had any motive force of its own, but because Flarl was so startled at the idea that it might.
The next thing that startled him was the sight of Ford Prefect hurtling across the desk at him fists first.
In fact Ford was just lunging for the credit card, but you don't get to occupy the sort of position that Flarl occupied in the sort of organisation in which Flarl occupied it without developing a healthily paranoid view of life.
Fie took the sensible precaution of hurling himself backwards, and striking his head a sharp blow on the rocket-proof glass, then subsided into a series of worrying and highly personal dreams.
Ford lay on the desk, surprised at how swimmingly everything had gone.
Fie glanced quickly at the piece of plastic he now held in his hand - it was a Dine-O-Charge credit card with his name already embossed on it, and an expiry date two years from now, and was possibly the single most exciting thing Ford had ever seen in his life - then he clambered over the desk to see to Flarl.
Fie was breathing fairly easily.
It occurred to Ford that he might breathe more easily yet without the weight of his wallet bearing down on his chest, so he slipped it out of Flarl's breast pocket and flipped through it.
Fair amount of cash.
Credit tokens.
Ultragolf club membership.
Other club memberships.
Photos of someone's wife and family - presumably Flarl's, but it was hard to be sure these days.
Busy executives often didn't have time for a full-time wife and family and would just rent them for weekends.
Ha!
He couldn't believe what he'd just found.
He slowly drew out from the wallet a single and insanely exciting piece of plastic that was nestling amongst a bunch of receipts.
It wasn't insanely exciting to look at.
It was rather dull in fact.
It was smaller and a little thicker than a credit card and semi transparent.
If you held it up to the light you could see a lot of holographically encoded information and images buried pseudo inches deep beneath its surface.
It was an Ident-i-Eeze, and was a very naughty and silly thing for Harl to have lying around in his wallet, though it was perfectly understandable.
There were so many different ways in which you were required to provide absolute proof of your identity these days that life could easily become extremely tiresome just from that factor alone, never mind the deeper existential problems of trying to function as a coherent consciousness in an epistemologically ambiguous physical universe.
Just look at cash point machines, for instance.
And that was just to get a bit of spare cash for the weekend.
If you were trying to raise a loan for a jetcar, sign a missile treaty or pay an entire restaurant bill things could get really trying.
Hence the Ident-i-Eeze.
This encoded every single piece of information about you, your body and your life into one all-purpose machine-readable card that you could then carry around in your wallet, and therefore represented technology's greatest triumph to date over both itself and plain common sense.
Ford pocketed it.
A remarkably good idea had just occurred to him.
He wondered how long Harl would remain unconscious.
The robot gurgled that it did.
The robot said that it was quite happy where it was up on the ceiling thank you very much.
It had never realised before how much sheer titillation there was to be got from a good ceiling and it wanted to explore its feelings about ceilings in greater depth.
The robot let out a long heartfelt sigh of impassioned tristesse and sank reluctantly away from the ceiling.
Don't give it any information.
Fie picked up his towel and ran cheerfully for the door.
Life had been a little dull of late.
It showed every sign now of becoming extremely froody.
To welcome visitors the arrivals hall featured a picture of the President of NowWhat, smiling.
It was the only picture anybody could find of him, and it had been taken shortly after he had shot himself so although the photo had been retouched as well as could be managed the smile it wore was rather a ghastly one.
The side of his head had been drawn back in crayon.
No replacement had been found for the photograph because no replacement had been found for the President.
There was only one ambition which anyone on the planet ever had, and that was to leave.
Arthur checked himself into a small motel on the outskirts of town, and sat glumly on the bed, which was damp, and flipped through the little information brochure, which was also damp.
It said that the planet of NowWhat had been named after the opening words of the first settlers to arrive there after struggling across light years of space to reach the furthest unexplored outreaches of the Galaxy.
The main town was called OhWell.
There weren't any other towns to speak of.
Settlement on NowWhat had not been a success and the sort of people who actually wanted to live on NowWhat were not the sort of people you would want to spend time with.
Trading was mentioned in the brochure.
The main trade that was carried out was in the skins of the NowWhattian boghog but it wasn't a very successful one because no one in their right minds would want to buy a NowWhattian boghog skin.
The trade only hung on by its fingernails because there was always a significant number of people in the Galaxy who were not in their right minds.
Arthur had felt very uncomfortable looking around at some of the other occupants of the small passenger compartment of the ship.
The brochure described some of the history of the planet.
Whoever had written it had obviously started out trying to drum up a little enthusiasm for the place by stressing that it wasn't actually cold and wet all the time, but could find little positive to add to this so the tone of the piece quickly degenerated into savage irony.
It talked about the early years of settlement.
It said that the major activities pursued on NowWhat were those of catching, skinning and eating NowWhattian boghogs, which were the only extant form of animal life on NowWhat, all other having long ago died of despair.
The boghogs were tiny, vicious creatures, and the small margin by which they fell short of being completely inedible was the margin by which life on the planet subsisted.
So what were the rewards, however small, that made life on NowWhat worth living?
Well, there weren't any.
Not a one.
Even making yourself some protective clothing out of boghog skins was an exercise in disappointment and futility, since the skins were unaccountably thin and leaky.
This caused a lot of puzzled conjecture amongst the settlers.
What was the boghog's secret of keeping warm?
If anyone had ever learnt the language the boghogs spoke to each other they would have discovered that there was no trick.
The boghogs were as cold and wet as anyone else on the planet.
No one had had the slightest desire to learn the language of the boghogs for the simple reason that these creatures communicated by biting each other very hard on the thigh.
Life on NowWhat being what it was, most of what a boghog might have to say about it could easily be signified by these means.
Arthur flipped through the brochure till he found what he was looking for.
At the back there were a few maps of the planet.
They were fairly rough and ready because they weren't likely to be of much interest to anyone, but they told him what he wanted to know.
He didn't recognise it at first because the maps were the other way up from the way he would have expected and looked, therefore thoroughly unfamiliar.
Of course, up and down, north and south, are absolutely arbitrary designations, but we are used to seeing things the way we are used to seeing them, and Arthur had to turn the maps upside-down to make sense of them.
There was one huge landmass off on the upper left-hand side of the page which tapered down to a tiny waist and then ballooned out again like a large comma.
On the right-hand side was a collection of large shapes jumbled familiarly together.
The outlines were not exactly the same, and Arthur didn't know if this was because the map was so rough, or because the sea-level was higher or because, well, things were just different here.
But the evidence was inarguable.
This was definitely the Earth.
Or rather, it most definitely was not.
It merely looked a lot like the Earth and occupied the same coordinates in space/time.
What co-ordinates it occupied in Probability was anybody's guess.
He sighed.
This, he realised, was about as close to home as he was likely to get.
Which meant that he was about as far from home as he could possibly be.
Glumly he slapped the brochure shut and wondered what on earth he was going to do next.
He allowed himself a hollow laugh at what he had just thought.
He looked at his old watch, and shook it a bit to wind it.
It had taken him, according to his own time-scale, a year of hard travelling to get here.
A year since the accident in hyperspace in which Fenchurch had completely vanished.
One minute she had been sitting there next to him in the SlumpJet; the next minute the ship had done a perfectly normal hyperspace hop and when he had next looked she was not there.
The seat wasn't even warm.
Her name wasn't even on the passenger list.
The spaceline had been wary of him when he had complained.
A lot of awkward things happen in space travel, and a lot of them make a lot of money for lawyers.
But when they had asked him what Galactic Sector he and Fenchurch had been from and he had said ZZ9 Plural Z Alpha they had relaxed completely in a way that Arthur wasn't at all sure he liked.
They even laughed a little, though sympathetically, of course.
They pointed to the clause in the ticket contract which said that the entities whose lifespans had originated in any of the Plural zones were advised not to travel in hyperspace and did so at their own risk.
Every-body, they said, knew that.
They tittered slightly and shook their heads.
As Arthur had left their offices he found he was trembling slightly.
Not only had he lost Fenchurch in the most complete and utter way possible, but he felt that the more time he spent away out in the Galaxy the more it seemed that the number of things he didn't know anything about actually increased.
Just as he was lost for a moment in these numb memories a knock came on the door of his motel room, which then opened immediately.
A fat and dishevelled man came in carrying Arthur's one small case.
There was a brief, ugly confusion of jabbering and thrashing.
The man shouted frantically and pointed.
Arthur grabbed a hefty stick that stood next to the door expressly for this purpose and beat at the boghog with it.
The boghog suddenly disengaged and limped backwards, dazed and forlorn.
It turned anxiously in the corner of the room, its tail tucked up right under its back legs, and stood looking nervously up at Arthur, jerking its head awkwardly and repeatedly to one side.
Its jaw seemed to be dislocated.
It cried a little and scraped its damp tail across the floor.
By the door, the fat man with Arthur's suitcase was sitting and cursing, trying to staunch the flow of blood from his thigh.
His clothes were already wet from the rain.
Arthur stared at the boghog, not knowing what to do.
The boghog looked at him questioningly.
It tried to approach him, waking mournful little whimpering noises.
It moved its jaw pain-fully.
It made a sudden leap for Arthur's thigh, but its dislocated jaw was too weak to get a grip and it sank, whining sadly, down to the floor.
The fat man jumped to his feet, grabbed the stick, beat the boghog's brains into a sticky, pulpy mess on the thin carpet, and then stood there breathing heavily as if daring the animal to move again, just once.
A single boghog eyeball sat looking reproachfully at Arthur from out of the mashed ruins of its head.
I just wanted to see if this was the right place or not.
He eyed the remains of the boghog with a deep, ancestral resentment.
He picked up the damp brochure lying on the bed and put it in his pocket.
He went to the door and looked out into the cold, wet night.
A single bird wheeled in the sky above him as he set off back for the spaceport.
Chapter 8 Ford had his own code of ethics.
It wasn't much of one, but it was his and he stuck by it, more or less.
One rule he made was never to buy his own drinks.
He wasn't sure if that counted as an ethic, but you have to go with what you've got.
He was also firmly and utterly opposed to all and any forms of cruelty to any animals whatsoever except geese.
And furthermore he would never steal from his employers.
Well, not exactly steal.
If his accounts supervisor didn't start to hyperventilate and put out a seal-all-exits security alert when Ford handed in his expenses claim then Ford felt he wasn't doing his job properly.
But actually stealing was another thing.
That was biting the hand that feeds you.
Sucking very hard on it, even nibbling it in an affectionate kind of a way was OK, but you didn't actually bite it.
Not when that hand was the Guide.
The Guide was something sacred and special.
But that, thought Ford as he ducked and weaved his way down through the building, was about to change.
And they had only themselves to blame.
Look at all this stuff.
Lines of neat grey office cubicles and executive workstation pods.
The whole place was dreary with the hum of memos and minutes of meetings flitting through its electronic networks.
Out in the street they were playing Hunt the Wocket for Zark's sake, but here in the very heart of the Guide offices no one was even recklessly kicking a ball around the corridors or wearing inappropriately coloured beachware.
Door after door magically opened to him without question.
Elevators took him happily to places they should not.
Ford was trying to pursue the most tangled and complicated route he could, heading generally down-wards through the building.
His happy little robot took care of everything, spreading waves of acquiescent joy through all the security circuits it encountered.
Ford thought it needed a name and decided to call it Emily Saunders, after a girl he had very fond memories of.
Then he thought that Emily Saunders was an absurd name for a security robot, and decided to call it Colin instead, after Emily's dog.
He was moving deep into the bowels of the building now, into areas he had never entered before, areas of higher and higher security.
He was beginning to encounter puzzled looks from the operatives he passed.
At this level of security you didn't even call them people anymore.
And they were probably doing stuff that only operatives would do.
The truth of the matter was that all sorts of highly dodgy stuff went on behind the cheery, happy-go-lucky front that the Guide liked to put up - or used to like to put up before this new InfiniDim Enterprises bunch marched in and started to make the whole thing highly dodgy.
There were all kinds of tax scams and rackets and graft and shady deals supporting the shining edifice, and down in the secure research and data-processing levels of the building was where it all went on.
Every few years the Guide would set up its business, and indeed its building on a new world, and all would be sunshine and laughter for a while as the Guide would put down its roots in the local culture and economy, provide employment, a sense of glamour and adventure and, in the end, not quite as much actual revenue as the locals had expected.
When the Guide moved on, taking its building with it, it left a little like a thief in the night.
Exactly like a thief in the night in fact.
It usually left in the very early hours of the morning, and the following day there always turned out to be a very great deal of stuff missing.
Whole cultures and economies would collapse in its wake, often within a week, leaving once thriving planets desolate and shell shocked but still somehow feeling they had been part of some great adventure.
Alarms were starting to go off in other parts of the building.
Perhaps that meant that Vann Harl had already been discovered, which might be a problem.
Ford had been hoping he would be able to slip the Ident-i-Eeze back into his pocket before he came round.
Well, that was a problem for later, and he didn't for the moment have the faintest idea how he was going to solve it.
For the moment he wasn't going to worry.
Wherever he went with little Colin, he was surrounded by a cocoon of sweetness and light and, most importantly, willing and acquiescent elevators and positively obsequious doors.
Ford even began to whistle, which was probably his mistake.
Nobody likes a whistler, particularly not the divinity that shapes our ends.
The next door wouldn't open.
And that was a pity, because it was the very one that Ford had been making for.
It stood there before him, grey and resolutely closed with a sign on it saying: NO ADMITTANCE.
NOT EVEN TO AUTHORISED PERSONNEL.
YOU ARE WASTING YOUR TIME HERE.
GO AWAY.
Colin reported that the doors had been getting generally a lot grimmer down in these lower reaches of the building.
They were about ten stories below ground level now.
The air was refrigerated and the tasteful grey hessian wall-weave had given way to brutal grey bolted steel walls.
Colin's rampant euphoria had subsided into a kind of determined cheeriness.
He said that he was beginning to tire a little.
It was taking all his energy to pump the slightest bonhomie whatsoever into the doors down here.
Ford kicked at the door.
It opened.
He walked in and Colin flew in after him.
Even with a wire stuck straight into his pleasure electrode his happiness was a nervous kind of happiness.
He bobbed around a little.
The room was small, grey and humming.
This was the nerve centre of the entire Guide.
The computer terminals that lined the grey walls were windows on to every aspect of the Guide's operations.
Here, on the left-hand side of the room, reports were gathered over the Sub-Etha-Net from field researchers in every corner of the Galaxy, fed straight up into the network of sub-editor's offices where they had all the good bits cut out by secretaries because the sub-editors were out having lunch.
The legal department would cut out anything that was still even remotely good from what remained and fire it back to the offices of the executive editors, who were also out at lunch.
So the editors secretaries would read it and say it was stupid and cut most of what was left.
What's the point of having somebody spending three whole orbital periods out in the bloody Gagrakacka Mind Zones, with all that stuff going on out there, if this load of anaemic squitter is the best he can be bothered to send us.
Got to have something going out there.
I've got a headache.
So the edited copy would go for one last slash and burn through the legal department, and then be sent back down here where it would be broadcast out over the Sub-Etha-Net for instantaneous retrieval anywhere in the Galaxy.
That was handled by equipment which was monitored and controlled by the terminals on the right- hand side of the room.
Meanwhile the order to disallow the researcher's expenses was relayed down to the computer terminal stuck off in the right-hand corner, and it was to this terminal that Ford Prefect now swiftly made his way.
There is an awful lot of stuff you don't know anything about, but you are not alone in this.
It's just that in your case the consequences of not knowing any of this stuff are particularly terrible, but then, hey, that's just the way the cookie gets completely stomped on and obliterated.
A computer terminal is not some clunky old television with a typewriter in front of it.
Ford hurried over to the terminal, sat in front of it and quickly dipped himself into its universe.
It wasn't the normal universe he knew.
It was a universe of densely enfolded worlds, of wild topographies, towering mountain peaks, heart stopping ravines, of moons shattering off into sea horses, hurtful blurting crevices, silently heaving oceans and bottomless hurtling hooping funts.
He held still to get his bearings.
He controlled his breathing, closed his eyes and looked again.
So this was where accountants spent their time.
There was clearly more to them than met the eye.
He looked around carefully, trying not to let it all swell and swim and overwhelm him.
He didn't know his way around this universe.
He didn't even know the physical laws that determined its dimensional extents or behaviours, but his instinct told him to look for the most outstanding feature he could detect and make towards it.
Way off in some indistinguishable distance - was it a mile or a million or a mote in his eye? - was a stunning peak that overarched the sky, climbed and climbed and spread out in flowering aigrettes3, agglomerates4, and arch imandrites5.
He weltered towards it, hooling and thurling, and at last reached it in a meaninglessly long umthingth of time.
He clung to it, arms outspread, gripping tightly on to its roughly gnarled and pitted surface.
Once he was certain that he was secure he made the hideous mistake of looking down.
While he had been weltering, hooling and thurling, the distance beneath him had not bothered him unduly, but now that he was gripping, the distance made his heart wilt and his brain bend.
His fingers were white with pain and tension.
His teeth were grinding and twisting against each other beyond his control.
His eyes turned inwards with waves from the willowing extremities of nausea.
With an immense effort of will and faith he simply let go and pushed.
He felt himself float.
Away.
And then, counter-intuitively, upwards.
And upwards.
He threw his shoulders back, let his arms drop, gazed upwards and let himself be drawn loosely, higher and higher.
Before long, insofar as such terms had any meaning in this virtual universe, a ledge loomed up ahead of him on which he could grip and on to which he could clamber.
He rose, he gripped, he clambered.
He panted a little.
This was all a little stressful.
He held tightly on to the ledge as he sat.
He wasn't certain if this was to prevent himself from falling down off it or rising up from it, but he needed something to grip on to as he surveyed the world in which he found himself.
The whirling, turning height span him and twisted his brain in upon itself till he found himself, eyes closed, whimpering and hugging the hideous wall of towering rock.
He slowly brought his breathing back under control again.
He told himself repeatedly that he was just in a graphic representation of a world.
A virtual universe.
A simulated reality.
He could snap back out of it at any moment.
He snapped back out of it.
He was sitting in a blue leatherette foam filled swivel-seated office chair in front of a computer terminal.
He relaxed.
He was clinging to the face of an impossibly high peak perched on a narrow ledge above a drop of brain-swivelling dimensions.
It wasn't just the landscape being so far beneath him - he wished it would stop undulating and waving.
He had to get a grip.
Not on the rock wall - that was an illusion.
He had to get a grip on the situation, be able to look at the physical world he was in while drawing himself out of it emotionally.
He clenched inwardly and then, just as he had let go of the rock face itself, he let go of the idea of the rock face and let himself just sit there clearly and freely.
He looked out at the world.
He was breathing well.
He was cool.
He was in charge again.
He was in a four-dimensional topological model of the Guide's financial systems, and somebody or something would very shortly want to know why.
And here they came.
Swooping through virtual space towards him came a small flock of mean and steely-eyed creatures with pointy little heads, pencil moustaches and querulous demands as to who he was, what he was doing there, what his authorisation was, what the authorisation of his authorising agent was, what his inside leg measurement was and so on.
Laser light flickered all over him as if he was a packet of biscuits at a supermarket check-out.
The heavier duty laser guns were held, for the moment, in reserve.
The fact that all of this was happening in virtual space made no difference.
Being virtually killed by a virtual laser in virtual space is just as effective as the real thing, because you are as dead as you think you are.
The laser readers were becoming very agitated as they flickered over his fingerprints, his retina and the follicle pattern where his hair line was receding.
They didn't like what they were finding at all.
The chattering and screeching of highly personal and insolent questions was rising in pitch.
A little surgical steel scraper was reaching out towards the skin at the nape of his neck when Ford, holding his breath and praying very slightly, pulled Vann Harl's Ident-i-Eeze out of his pocket and waved it in front of them.
Instantly every laser was diverted to the little card and Swept backwards and forwards over it and in it, examining and reading every molecule.
Then, just as suddenly, they stopped.
The entire flock of little virtual inspectors snapped to attention.
Ford smiled a slow and vicious smile.
Five minutes later he was out of there.
About thirty seconds to do the job, and three minutes thirty to cover his tracks.
Fie could have done anything he liked in the virtual structure, more or less.
Fie could have transferred ownership of the entire organisation into his own name, but he doubted if that would have gone unnoticed.
Fie didn't want it anyway.
It would have meant responsibility, working late nights at the office, not to mention massive and time-consuming fraud investigations and a fair amount of time in jail.
Fie wanted something that nobody other than the computer would notice: that was the bit that took thirty seconds.
The thing that took three minutes thirty was programming the computer not to notice that it had noticed anything.
It had to want not to know about what Ford was up to, and then he could safely leave the computer to rationalise its own defences against the information ever emerging.
It was a programming technique that had been reverse-engineered from the sort of psychotic mental blocks that otherwise perfectly normal people had been observed invariably to develop when elected to high political office.
The other minute was spent discovering that the computer system already had a mental block.
A big one.
Fie would never have discovered it if he hadn't been busy engineering a mental block himself.
Fie came across a whole slew of smooth and plausible denial procedures and diversionary subroutines exactly where he had been planning to install his own.
The computer denied all knowledge of them, of course, then blankly refused to accept that there was anything even to deny knowledge of, and was generally so convincing that even Ford almost found himself thinking he must have made a mistake.
Fie was impressed.
Fie was so impressed, in fact, that he didn't bother to install his own mental block procedures, he just set up calls to the ones that were already there, which then called themselves when questioned, and so on.
He quickly set about debugging the little bits of code he had installed himself, only to discover they weren't there.
Cursing, he searched all over for them, but could find no trace of them at all.
He was just about to start installing them all over again when he realised that the reason he couldn't find them was that they were working already.
He grinned with satisfaction.
He tried to discover what the computer's other mental block was all about, but it seemed, not unnaturally, to have a mental block about it.
He could no longer find any trace of it at all, in fact; it was that good.
He wondered if he had been imagining it.
He wondered if he had been imagining that it was something to do with something in the building, and something to do with the number 13.
He ran a few tests.
Yes, he had obviously been imagining it.
No time for fancy routes now, there was obviously a major security alert in progress.
Ford took the elevator up to the ground floor to change to the express elevators.
He had somehow to get the Ident-i- Eeze back into Harl's pocket before it was missed.
How, he didn't know.
The doors of the elevator slid open to reveal a large posse of security guards and robots poised waiting for it and brandishing filthy looking weapons.
They ordered him out.
With a shrug he stepped forward.
They all pushed rudely past him into the elevator which took them down to continue their search for him on the lower levels.
This was fun, thought Ford, giving Colin a friendly pat.
Colin was about the first genuinely useful robot Ford had ever encountered.
Colin bobbed along in the air in front of him in a lather of cheerful ecstasy.
Ford was glad he'd named him after a dog.
He was highly tempted just to leave at that point and hope for the best, but he knew that the best had a far greater chance of actually occurring if Harl did not discover that his Ident-i-Eeze was missing.
He had somehow, surreptitiously, to return it.
They went to the express elevators.
The elevator lit up the twenty-third floor on its floor display and started to zoom upwards.
Something about the floor display tweaked at Ford's mind but he couldn't catch what it was and forgot about it.
He was more worried about the idea of the floor he was going to being a popular one.
He hadn't really thought through how he was going to deal with whatever it was that was happening up there because he had no idea what he was going to find.
He would just have to busk it.
They were there.
The doors slid open.
Ominous quiet.
Empty corridor.
There was the door to Harl's office, with a slight layer of dust around it.
Ford knew that this dust consisted of billions of tiny molecular robots that had crawled out of the woodwork, built each other, rebuilt the door, disassembled each other and then crept back into the woodwork again and just waited for damage.
Ford wondered what kind of life that was, but not for long because he was a lot more concerned about what his own life was like at that moment.
He took a deep breath and started his run.
Chapter 9 Arthur felt at a bit of a loss.
There was a whole Galaxy of stuff out there for him, and he wondered if it was churlish of him to complain to himself that it lacked just two things: the world he was born on and the woman he loved.
Damn it and blast it, he thought, and felt the need of some guidance and advice.
He consulted the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
He headed to the outer Eastern Rim of the Galaxy where, it was said, wisdom and truth were to be found, most particularly on the planet Hawalius, which was a planet of oracles and seers and soothsayers and also take-away pizza shops, because most mystics were completely incapable of cooking for themselves.
However it appeared that some sort of calamity had befallen this planet.
As Arthur wandered the streets of the village where the major prophets lived, it had something of a crestfallen air.
He came across one prophet who was clearly shutting up shop in a despondent kind of way and asked him what was happening.
Arthur held up the unnailed end of the plank and the old prophet scuttled into the recesses of his hovel, returning a moment or two later with a small Sub-Etha radio.
He turned it on, fiddled with the dial for a moment and put the thing on the small wooden bench that he usually sat and prophesied on.
He then took hold of the plank again and resumed hammering.
Arthur sat and listened to the radio.
Arthur pushed the preset button.
Arthur pushed the button again.
Arthur blinked.
The sound of cheering crowds and a hubbub of brass bands erupted from the radio.
The prophet swiped the radio off the bench and on to the dusty ground, where it squawked like a badly tuned chicken.
Not that, this.
No, not like that.
This way up.
Fie spat into the dust.
Fler name's Trillian.
I don't know where she got the Astra from.
She's from the same planet as me.
We can't get the tri-d TV stations out here of course, thank the Great Green Arkleseizure, but you hear her on the radio, gallivanting here and there through space/time.
She wants to settle down and find herself a steady era that young lady does.
It'll all end in tears.
He swung with his hammer and hit his thumb rather hard.
He started to speak in tongues.
The village of oracles wasn't much better.
He had been told that when looking for a good oracle it was best to find the oracle that other oracles went to, but he was shut.
Smoke and steam were rising from, respectively, a small fire and a battered tin pot that was hanging over it.
There was also a very nasty smell coming from the pot.
At least Arthur thought it was coming from the pot.
The distended bladders of some of the local goat-like things were hanging from a propped-up line drying in the sun, and the smell could have been coming from them.
There was also, a worryingly small distance away, a pile of discarded bodies of the local goat-like things and the smell could have been coming from them.
But the smell could just as easily have been coming from the old lady who was busy beating flies away from the pile of bodies.
It was a hopeless task because each of the flies was about the size of a winged bottle top and all she had was a table tennis bat.
Also she seemed half blind.
Every now and then, by chance, her wild thrashing would connect with one of the flies with a richly satisfying thunk, and the fly would hurtle through the air and smack itself open against the rock face a few yards from the entrance to her cave.
She gave every impression, by her demeanour, that these were the moments she lived for.
Arthur watched this exotic performance for a while from a polite distance, and then at last tried giving a gentle cough to attract her attention.
The gentle cough, courteously meant, unfortunately involved first inhaling rather more of the local atmosphere than he had so far been doing and as a result, he erupted into a fit of raucous expectoration, and collapsed against the rock face, choking and streaming with tears.
He struggled for breath, but each new breath made things worse.
He vomited, half-choked again, rolled over his vomit, kept rolling for a few yards, and eventually made it up on to his hands and knees and crawled, panting, into slightly fresher air.
He got some breath back.
He gestured helplessly towards the small pile of his own vomit lying spread around the entrance to her cave.
This at least had gained her attention.
She looked round at him suspiciously, but, being half blind, had difficulty finding him in the blurred and rocky landscape.
He waved, helpfully.
At last she spotted him, grunted to herself and turned back to whacking flies.
It was horribly apparent from the way that currents of air moved when she did, that the major source of the smell was in fact her.
The drying bladders, the festering bodies and the noxious potage may all have been making violent contributions to the atmosphere, but the major olfactory presence was the woman herself.
She got another good thwack at a fly.
It smacked against the rock and dribbled its insides down it in what she clearly regarded, if she could see that far, as a satisfactory manner.
Unsteadily, Arthur got to his feet and brushed himself down with a fistful of dried grass.
He didn't know what else to do by way of announcing himself.
He had half a mind just to wander off again, but felt awkward about leaving a pile of his vomit in front of the entrance to the woman's home.
He wondered what to do about it.
He started to pluck up more handsful of the scrubby dried grass that was to be found here and there.
He was worried, though, that if he ventured nearer to the vomit he might simply add to it rather than clear it up.
Just as he was debating with himself as to what the right course of action was he began to realise that she was at last saying something to him.
She turned to peer at him, myopically, then turned back, swiped at a fly and missed.
She seemed to be waving her bat more or less at random now.
Arthur fished the crumpled-up brochure from his pocket.
He wasn't quite certain why.
He had already read it and she, he expected, wouldn't want to.
He unfolded it anyway in order to have something to frown thoughtfully at for a moment or two.
The copy in the brochure wittered on about the ancient mystical arts of the seers and sages of Hawalius, and wildly over-represented the level of accommodation available in Hawalion.
Arthur still carried a copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy with him but found, when he consulted it, that the entries were becoming more abstruse and paranoid and had lots of x's and j's and's in them.
Something was wrong somewhere.
Whether it was in his own personal unit, or whether it was something or someone going terribly amiss, or perhaps just hallucinating, at the heart of the Guide organisation itself, he didn't know.
But one way or another he was even less inclined to trust it than usual, which meant that he trusted it not one bit, and mostly used it for eating his sandwiches off when he was sitting on a rock staring at something.
The woman had turned and was walking slowly towards him now.
Arthur tried, without making it too obvious, to judge the wind direction, and bobbed about a bit as she approached.
There were some coupons as well, but Arthur had been far too embarrassed actually to cut them out or try to present them to anybody.
On what?
He was trying desperately, with tiny darting movements, to stay upwind of her.
She surprised him by suddenly turning sharply away from him and heading off towards her cave.
It's solar-powered.
Arthur did as she advised.
He almost hyperventilated in fact.
When he felt he was ready, he held his breath and followed her in.
The photocopier was a big old thing on a rickety trolley.
It stood just inside the dim shadows of the cave.
The wheels were stuck obstinately in different directions and the ground was rough and stony.
Arthur was going red in the face trying to help her move the thing.
He nodded in relief.
If she wasn't going to be embarrassed about it then neither, he was determined, would he.
He stepped outside and took a few breaths, then came back in to do more heaving and pushing.
He had to do this quite a few times till at last the machine was outside.
The sun beat down on it.
The old woman disappeared back into her cave again and brought with her some mottled metal panels, which she connected to the machine to collect the sun's energy.
She squinted up into the sky.
The sun was quite bright, but the day was hazy and vague.
Arthur said he was happy to wait.
The old woman shrugged and stomped across to the fire.
Above it, the contents of the tin can were bubbling away.
She poked about at them with a stick.
She stirred with the stick.
After a few minutes she fished a lump of something out, blew on it to cool it a little, and then put it in her mouth.
She chewed on it thoughtfully for a bit.
Then she hobbled slowly across to the pile of dead goat-like things.
She spat the lump out on to the pile.
She hobbled slowly back to the can.
She tried to unhook it from the sort of tripod-like thing that it was hanging from.
He hurried over.
Together they disengaged the tin from the tripod and carried it awkwardly down the slight slope that led downwards from her cave and towards a line of scrubby and gnarled trees, which marked the edge of a steep but quite shallow gully, from, which a whole new range of offensive smells was emanating.
Arthur realised just in time what she intended.
Together they tossed the contents of the tin into the gully.
After an hour or two of uncommunicative silence, the old woman decided that the solar panels had absorbed enough sunlight to run the photocopier now and she disappeared to rummage inside her cave.
She emerged at last with a few sheaves of paper and fed them through the machine.
She handed the copies to Arthur.
You see, the quality of any advice anybody has to offer has to be judged against the quality of life they actually lead.
Now, as you look through this document you'll see that I've underlined all the major decisions I ever made to make them stand out.
They're all indexed and cross- referenced.
See?
She grabbed up her table tennis bat, rolled up her sleeve, stomped off to her pile of dead goat-like things, and started to set about the flies with vim and vigour.
The last village Arthur visited consisted entirely of extremely high poles.
They were so high that it wasn't possible to tell, from the ground, what was on top of them, and Arthur had to climb three before he found one that had anything on top of it at all other than a platform covered with bird droppings.
Not an easy task.
You went up the poles by climbing on the short wooden pegs that had been hammered into them in slowly ascending spirals.
Anybody who was a less diligent tourist than Arthur would have taken a couple of snapshots and sloped right off to the nearest Bar & Grill, where you also could buy a range of particularly sweet and gooey chocolate cakes to eat in front of the ascetics.
But, largely as a result of this, most of the ascetics had gone now.
In fact they had mostly gone and set up lucrative therapy centres on some of the more affluent worlds in the North West ripple of the Galaxy, where the living was easier by a factor of about seventeen million, and the chocolate was just fabulous.
Most of the ascetics, it turned out, had not known about chocolate before they took up asceticism.
Most of the clients who came to their therapy centres knew about it all too well.
At the top of the third pole Arthur stopped for a breather.
He was very hot and out of breath, since each pole was about fifty or sixty feet high.
The world seemed to swing vertiginously around him, but it didn't worry Arthur too much.
He knew that, logically, he could not die until he had been to Stavromula Beta6, and had therefore managed to cultivate a merry attitude towards extreme personal danger.
He felt a little giddy perched fifty feet up in the air on top of a pole, but he dealt with it by eating a sandwich.
He was just about to embark on reading the photocopied life history of the oracle, when he was rather startled to hear a slight cough behind him.
He turned so abruptly that he dropped his sandwich, which turned downwards through the air and was rather small by the time it was stopped by the ground.
About thirty feet behind Arthur was another pole, and, alone amongst the sparse forest of about three dozen poles, the top of it was occupied.
It was occupied by an old man who, in turn, seemed to be occupied by profound thoughts that were making him scowl.
The man ignored him.
Perhaps he couldn't hear him.
The breeze was moving about a bit.
It was only by chance that Arthur had heard the slight cough.
The man at last glanced round at him.
He seemed surprised to see him.
Arthur couldn't tell if he was surprised and pleased to see him or just surprsised.
The man frowned in incomprehension.
Arthur couldn't tell if he couldn't understand or couldn't hear.
He clambered off the small platform and climbed quickly down the spiralling pegs, arriving at the bottom quite dizzy.
He started to make his way over to the pole on which the old man was sitting, and then suddenly realised that he had disoriented himself on the way down and didn't know for certain which one it was.
He looked around for landmarks and worked out which was the right one.
He climbed it.
It wasn't.
Down he went again, getting very hot and bothered.
When he arrived, panting and sweating, at the top of the pole that he knew for certain was the right one he realised that the man was, somehow or other, mucking him about.
He was now sitting on top of the pole that Arthur recognised was the one that he had been on himself when eating his sandwich.
I go south in the winter.
Got a beach house.
The man stared out over the hot, dry scrubby landscape.
From here Arthur could just see the old woman, a tiny speck in the distance, dancing up and down swatting flies.
I got the beach house because she turned it down.
The horizon was swimming in a fetid heat haze.
He turned and looked at Arthur.
Oddly, the man's face was now only a couple of feet away.
He seemed in one way to be a perfectly normal shape, but his body was sitting cross-legged on a pole forty feet away while his face was only two feet from Arthur's.
Without moving his head, and without seeming to do anything odd at all, he stood up and stepped on to the top of another pole.
Either it was just the heat, thought Arthur, or space was a different shape for him.
Though the best ones are.
Where earth meets air.
Where body meets mind.
Where space meets time.
Arthur got terribly excited.
This was exactly the sort of thing he'd been promised in the brochure.
Here was a man who seemed to be moving through some kind of Escher space saying really profound things about all sorts of stuff.
It was unnerving though.
The man was now stepping from pole to ground, from ground to pole, from pole to pole, from pole to horizon and back: he was making complete nonsense of Arthur's spatial universe.
Arthur said, suddenly.
Without the slightest movement he was now back, sitting cross-legged, on top of the pole forty feet in front of Arthur.
Hmmm.
So we'll have to tell you something you already know but make it sound like news, eh?
He sighed and squinted mournfully into the distance.
Arthur decided to be clever.
He was fed up with being mistaken for a complete idiot by everyone he ever met.
The old man sighed again.
When he brought his hand round to the front again, he had a globe of the Earth spinning on his up-pointed forefinger.
It was unmistakable.
He put it away again.
Arthur was stunned.
You cannot know what I know because you know what you know.
What I see and what I know cannot be added to what you see and what you know because they are not of the same kind.
Arthur looked at him doubtfully.
Protect me from even knowing that there are things to know that I don't know.
Protect me from knowing that I decided not to know about the things that I decided not to know about.
That's it.
It's best to put that bit in, just in case.
Protect me from the consequences of the above prayer.
And that's it.
Chapter 10 Ford hurled himself at the door of the editor-in-chiefs office, tucked himself into a tight ball as the frame splintered and gave way once again, rolled rapidly across the floor to where the smart grey crushed leather sofa was and set up his strategic operational base behind it.
That, at least, was the plan.
Unfortunately the smart grey crushed leather sofa wasn't there.
Why, thought Ford, as he twisted himself round in mid-air, lurched, dived and scuttled for cover behind Harl's desk, did people have this stupid obsession with rearranging their office furniture every five minutes?
Why, for instance, replace a perfectly serviceable if rather muted grey crushed leather sofa with what appeared to be a small tank?
And who was the big guy with the mobile rocket launcher on his shoulder?
Someone from head office?
Couldn't be.
This was head office.
At least it was the head office of the Guide.
Where these InfiniDim Enterprises guys came from Zarquon knew.
Nowhere very sunny, judging from the slug-like colour and texture of their skins.
This was all wrong, thought Ford.
People connected with the Guide should come from sunny places.
There were several of them, in fact, and all of them seemed to be more heavily armed and armoured than you normally expected corporate executives to be, even in today's rough and tumble business world.
Fie was making a lot of assumptions here, of course.
Fie had a nagging suspicion that this was not a business meeting, though.
He also had a nagging feeling that these slug-like creatures were familiar to him in some way.
Familiar, but in an unfamiliar guise.
Well, he had been in the room for a good two and a half seconds now, and thought that it was probably about time to start doing something constructive.
He could take a hostage.
That would be good.
Vann Harl was in his swivel chair, looking alarmed, pale and shaken.
Had probably had some bad news as well as a nasty bang to the back of his head.
Ford leapt to his feet and made a running grab for him.
Under the pretext of getting him into a good solid double underpinned elbow-lock.
Ford managed surreptitiously to slip the Ident-i-Eeze back into Harl's inner pocket.
Bingo!
He'd done what he came to do.
Now he just had to talk his way out of here.
He paused.
The big guy with the rocket launcher was turning towards Ford Prefect and pointing it at him, which Ford couldn't help feeling was wildly irresponsible behaviour.
There was a deafening roar as flames leapt from the back of the rocket launcher and a rocket leapt from its front.
The rocket hurtled past Ford and hit the large plate-glass window, which billowed outwards in a shower of a million shards under the force of the explosion.
Huge shock waves of noise and air pressure reverberated around the room, sweeping a couple of chairs, a filing cabinet and Colin the security robot out of the window.
Ah!
So they're not totally rocket-proof after all, thought Ford Prefect to himself.
Someone should have a word with somebody about that.
He disentangled himself from Harl and tried to work out which way to run.
He was surrounded.
The big guy with the rocket launcher was moving it up into position for another shot.
Ford was completely at a loss for what to do next.
What the hell, he thought, you're only young once, and threw himself out of the window.
That would at least keep the element of surprise on his side.
Chapter 11 The first thing Arthur Dent had to do, he realised resignedly, was to get himself a life.
This meant he had to find a planet he could have one on.
It had to be a planet he could breathe on, where he could stand up and sit down without experiencing gravitational discomfort.
It had to be somewhere where the acid levels were low and the plants didn't actually attack you.
You know.
The strange thing behind the desk waved some of its stranger bits around and seemed rather taken aback by this.
It oozed and glopped off its seat, thrashed its way slowly across the floor, ingested the old metal filing cabinet and then, with a great belch, excreted the appropriate drawer.
It popped out a couple of glistening tentacles from its ear, removed some files from the drawer, sucked the drawer back in and vomited up the cabinet again.
It thrashed its way back across the floor, slimed its way back up on to the seat and slapped the files on the table.
Arthur looked nervously through some grubby and damp pieces of paper.
He was definitely in some backwater part of the Galaxy here, and somewhere off to the left as far as the universe he knew and recognised was concerned.
In the space where his own home should have been there was a rotten hick planet, drowned with rain and inhabited by thugs and boghogs.
Even The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy seemed to work only fitfully here, which was why he was reduced to making these sorts of enquiries in these sorts of places.
One place he always asked after was Stavromula Beta, but no one had ever heard of such a planet.
The available worlds looked pretty grim.
They had little to offer him because he had little to offer them.
He had been extremely chastened to realise that although he originally came from a world which had cars and computers and ballet and armagnac he didn't, by himself, know how any of it worked.
He couldn't do it.
Left to his own devices he couldn't build a toaster.
He could just about make a sandwich and that was it.
There was not a lot of demand for his services.
Arthur's heart sank.
This surprised him, because he thought it was already about as low as it could possibly be.
He closed his eyes for a moment.
He so much wanted to be home.
He so much wanted his own home world, the actual Earth he had grown up on, not to have been demolished.
He so much wanted none of this to have happened.
He so much wanted that when he opened his eyes again he would be standing on the doorstep of his little cottage in the west country of England, that the sun would be shining over the green hills, the post van would be going up the lane, the daffodils would be blooming in his garden, and in the distance the pub would be opening for lunch.
He so much wanted to take the newspaper down to the pub and read it over a pint of bitter.
He so much wanted to do the crossword.
He so much wanted to be able to get completely stuck on 17 across.
He opened his eyes.
The strange thing was pulsating irritably at him, tapping some kind of pseudopodia on the desk.
Arthur shook his head and looked at the next sheet of paper.
Grim, he thought.
And the next.
Very grim.
And the next.
Oh...
Now that looked better.
It was a world called Bartledan.
It had oxygen.
It had green hills.
It even, it seemed, had a renowned literary culture.
But the thing that most aroused his interest was a photograph of a small bunch of Bartledanian people, standing around in a village square, smiling pleasantly at the camera.
Its eyes squirmed out on stalks and roiled up and down the piece of paper, leaving a glistening trail of slime all over it.
Arthur moved to Bartledan and, using some money he had made by selling some toenail clippings and spit to a DNA bank, he bought himself a room in the village featured in the picture.
It was pleasant there.
The air was balmy.
The people looked like him and seemed not to mind him being there.
They didn't attack him with anything.
He bought some clothes and a cupboard to put them in.
He had got himself a life.
Now he had to find a purpose in it.
At first he tried to sit and read.
But the literature of Bartledan, famed though it was throughout this sector of the Galaxy for its subtlety and grace, didn't seem to be able to sustain his interest.
The problem was that it wasn't actually about human beings after all.
It wasn't about what human beings wanted.
He soon learned to avoid these conversations.
More puzzlement.
Good question, thought Arthur to himself, and retreated back to his room to think about things.
On the one hand he could only recognise and respect what he learnt about the Bartledanian view of the universe, which was that the universe was what the universe was, take it or leave it.
On the other hand he could not help but feel that not to desire anything, not ever to. wish or to hope, was just not natural.
Natural.
There was a tricky word.
He had long ago realised that a lot of things that he had thought of as natural, like buying people presents at Christmas, stopping at red lights or falling at a rate of 32 feet/second/second, were just the habits of his own world and didn't necessarily work the same way anywhere else; but not to wish - that really couldn't be natural, could it?
That would be like not breathing.
Breathing was another thing that the Bartledanians didn't do, despite all the oxygen in the atmosphere.
They just stood there.
It was, for some reason, unnecessary.
Arthur quickly learned that playing netball with them was just too spooky.
Though they looked like humans, and even moved and sounded like humans, they didn't breathe and they didn't wish for things.
Breathing and wishing for things, on the other hand, was just about all that Arthur seemed to do all day.
Sometimes he would wish for things so much that his breathing would get quite agitated, and he would have to go and lie down for a bit.
On his own.
In his small room.
So far from the world which had given birth to him that his brain could not even process the sort of numbers involved without just going limp.
He preferred not to think about it.
He preferred just to sit and read - or at least he would prefer it if there was anything worth reading.
But nobody in Bartledanian stories ever wanted anything.
Not even a glass of water.
Certainly, they would fetch one if they were thirsty, but if there wasn't one available, they would think no more about it.
He had just read an entire book in which the main character had, over the course of a week, done some work in his garden, played a great deal of netball, helped mend a road, fathered a child on his wife and then unexpectedly died of thirst just before the last chapter.
In exasperation Arthur had combed his way back through the book and in the end had found a passing reference to some problem with the plumbing in Chapter 2.
And that was it.
So the guy dies.
It just happens.
It wasn't even the climax of the book, because there wasn't one.
The character died about a third of the way through the penultimate chapter of the book, and the rest of it was just more stuff about road- mending.
The book just finished dead at the one hundred thousandth word, because that was how long books were on Bartledan.
Arthur threw the book across the room, sold the room and left.
He started to travel with wild abandon, trading in more and more spit, toenails, fingernails, blood, hair, anything that anybody wanted, for tickets.
For semen, he discovered, he could travel first class.
He settled nowhere, but only existed in the hermetic, twilight world of the cabins of hyperspatial starships, eating, drinking, sleeping, watching movies, only stopping at spaceports to donate more DNA and catch the next long-haul ship out.
He waited and waited for another accident to happen.
The trouble with trying to make the right accident happen is that it won't.
The accident that eventually occurred was not what he had planned at all.
The ship he was on blipped in hyperspace, flickered horribly between ninety- seven different points in the Galaxy simultaneously, caught the unexpected gravitational pull of an uncharted planet in one of them, became ensnared in its outer atmosphere and began to fall, screaming and tearing, into it.
The ship's systems protested all the way down that everything was perfectly normal and under control, but when it went into a final hectic spin, ripped wildly through half a mile of trees and finally exploded into a seething ball of flame it became clear that this was not the case.
Fire engulfed the forest, boiled into the night, then neatly put itself out, as all unscheduled fires over a certain size are now required to do by law.
For a short while afterwards, other small fires flared up here and there as odd pieces of scattered debris exploded quietly in their own time.
Then they too died away.
Arthur Dent, because of the sheer boredom of endless inter-stellar flight, was the only one on board who had actually familiarised himself with the ship's safety procedures in case of an unscheduled landing, and was therefore the sole survivor.
Black, roaring silences swam sickeningly through his shattered mind.
He knew with a kind of resigned certainty that he would survive, because he had not yet been to Stavromula Beta.
After what seemed an eternity of pain and darkness, he became aware of quiet shapes moving around him.
Chapter 12 Ford tumbled through the open air in a cloud of glass splinters and chair parts.
Again, he hadn't really thought things through, really, and was just playing it by ear, buying time.
At times of major crisis he found it was often quite helpful to have his life flash before his eyes.
It gave him a chance to reflect on things, see things in some sort of perspective, and it sometimes furnished him with a vital clue as to what to do next.
There was the ground rushing up to meet him at 30 feet per second per second, but he would, he thought, deal with that problem when he got to it.
First things first.
Ah, here it came.
His childhood.
Flum drum stuff, he'd been through it all before.
Images flashed by.
Boring times on Betelgeuse Five.
Zaphod Beeblebrox as a kid.
Yes he knew all that.
Fie wished he had some kind of fast forward in his brain.
His seventh birthday party, being given his first towel.
Come on, come on.
Fie was twisting and turning downwards, the outside air at this height a cold shock to his lungs.
Trying not to inhale glass.
Early voyages to other planets.
Oh for Zark's sake, this was like some sort of bloody travelogue documentary before the main feature.
First beginning to work for the Guide.
Ah!
Those were the days.
They worked out of a hut on the Bwenelli Atoll on Fanalla before the Riktanarqals and the Danqueds vertled it.
Ha If a dozen guys, some towels, a handful of highly sophisticated digital devices, and most importantly a lot of dreams.
No.
Most importantly a lot of Fanallan rum.
Whatever happened to those?
He couldn't quite remember what the dreams were in fact, but they had seemed immensely important at the time.
They had certainly not involved this huge towering office block he was now falling down the side of.
All of that had come when some of the original team had started to settle down and get greedy, while he and others had stayed out in the field, researching and hitch hiking, and gradually becoming more and more isolated from the corporate nightmare the Guide had inexorably turned into, and the architectural monstrosity it had come to occupy.
Where were the dreams in that?
He had half a mind just to keep on falling.
Two fingers to the lot of them.
He was just passing the seventeenth floor now, where the marketing department hung out.
Load of tosspots all arguing about what colour the Guide should be and exercising their infinitely infallible skills of being wise after the event.
If any of them had chosen to look out of the window at that moment they would have been startled by the sight of Ford Prefect dropping past them to his certain death and flicking V-signs at them.
Sixteenth floor.
Sub-editors.
Bastards.
What about all that copy of his they'd cut?
Fifteen years of research he'd filed from one planet alone and they'd cut it to two words.
V-signs to them as well.
Fifteenth floor.
Logistical Administration, whatever that was about.
They all had big cars.
That, he thought, was what that was about.
Fourteenth floor.
Personnel.
Thirteenth floor.
Research and development.
Hang about.
Thirteenth floor.
He was having to think rather fast at the moment because the situation was becoming a little urgent.
He suddenly remembered the floor display panel in the elevator.
It hadn't had a thirteenth floor.
He'd thought no more about it because, having spent fifteen years on the rather backward planet Earth where they were superstitious about the number thirteen, he was used to being in buildings that numbered their floors without it.
No reason for that here, though.
The windows of the thirteenth floor, he could not help noticing as he flashed swiftly by them, were darkened.
What was going on in there?
He started to remember all the stuff that Harl had been talking about.
One, new, multi-dimensional Guide spread across an infinite number of universes.
It had sounded, the way Harl had put it, like wild meaninglessness dreamed up by the marketing department with the backing of the accountants.
If it was any more real than that then it was a very weird and dangerous idea.
Was it real?
What was going on behind the darkened windows of the sealed-off thirteenth floor?
Ford felt a rising sense of curiosity, and then a rising sense of panic.
That was the complete list of rising feelings he had.
In every other respect he was falling very rapidly.
He really ought to turn his mind to wondering how he was going to get out of this situation alive.
He glanced down.
A hundred feet or so below him people were milling around, some of them beginning to look up expectantly.
Clearing a space for him.
Even temporarily calling off the wonderful and completely fatuous hunt for wockets.
He would hate to disappoint them, but about two feet below him, he hadn't realised before, was Colin.
Colin had obviously been happily dancing attendance and waiting for him to decide what he wanted to do.
Ford bawled.
Colin didn't respond.
Ford went cold.
Then he suddenly realised that he hadn't told Colin his name was Colin.
Ford bawled.
Colin bobbed up beside him.
Colin was enjoying the ride down immensely and hoped that Ford was, too.
Colin's world went unexpectedly dark as Ford's towel suddenly enveloped him.
Colin immediately felt himself get much, much heavier.
He was thrilled and delighted by the challenge that Ford had presented him with.
Just not sure if he could handle it, that was all.
The towel was slung over Colin.
Ford was hanging from the towel, gripping to its seams.
Other hitchhikers had seen fit to modify their towels in exotic ways, weaving all kinds of esoteric tools and utilities and even computer equipment into their fabric.
Ford was a purist.
He liked to keep things simple.
He carried a regular towel from a regular domestic soft furnishings shop.
It even had a kind of blue and pink floral pattern despite his repeated attempts to bleach and stone wash it.
It had a couple of pieces of wire threaded into it, a bit of flexible writing stick, and also some nutrients soaked into one of the corners of the fabric so he could suck it in an emergency, but otherwise it was a simple towel you could dry your face on.
The only actual modification he had been persuaded by a friend to make to it was to reinforce the seams.
Ford gripped the seams like a maniac.
They were still descending, but the rate had slowed.
Nothing.
I want you, Colin, to go up.
OK?
Nothing.
Or rather a sort of muffled groaning sound from Colin.
Ford was very anxious.
They were descending very slowly now, but Ford was very anxious about the sort of people he could see assembling on the ground beneath him.
Friendly, local, wocket- hunting types were dispersing, and thick, heavy, bull-necked, slug-like creatures with rocket launchers were, it seemed, sliding out of what was usually called thin air.
Thin air, as all experienced Galactic travellers well know, is, in fact, extremely thick with multi dimensional complexities.
Colin was straining and groaning.
They were now more or less stationary in the air.
Ford felt as if his fingers were breaking.
They stayed put.
A slug was preparing to launch a rocket at him.
Ford couldn't believe it.
He was hanging from a towel in mid-air and a slug was preparing to fire rockets at him.
He was running out of anything he could think of doing and was beginning to get seriously alarmed.
This was the sort of predicament that he usually relied on having the Guide available for to give advice, however infuriating or glib, but this was not a moment for reaching into his pocket.
And the Guide seemed to be no longer a friend and ally but was now itself a source of danger.
These were the Guide offices he was hanging outside, for Zark's sake, in danger of his life from the people who now appeared to own the thing.
What had become of all the dreams he vaguely remembered having on the Bwenelli Atoll?
They should have let it all be.
They should have stayed there.
Stayed on the beach.
Loved good women.
Lived on fish.
He should have known it was all wrong the moment they started hanging grand pianos over the sea-monster pool in the atrium.
He began to feel thoroughly wasted and miserable.
His fingers were on fire with clenched pain.
And his ankle was still hurting.
Oh thank you, ankle, he thought to himself bitterly.
Thank you for bringing up your problems at this time.
I expect you'd like a nice warm footbath to make you feel better, wouldn't you?
Or at least you'd like me to...
He had an idea.
The armoured slug had hoisted the rocket launcher up on to its shoulder.
The rocket was presumably designed to hit anything in its path that moved.
Ford tried not to sweat because he could feel his grip on the seams of his towel slipping.
With the toe of his good foot he nudged and prised at the heel of the shoe on his hurting foot.
Ford muttered hopelessly to Colin, who was cheerily straining away but unable to rise.
Ford worked away at the heel of his shoe.
He was trying to judge the timing, but there was no point.
Just go for it.
He only had one shot and that was it.
He had now eased the back of his shoe down off his heel.
His twisted ankle felt a little better.
Well that was good, wasn't it?
With his other foot he kicked at the heel of the shoe.
It slipped off his foot and fell through the air.
About half a second later a rocket erupted up from the muzzle of its launcher, encountered the shoe falling through its path, went straight for it, hit it, and exploded with a great sense of satisfaction and achievement.
This happened about fifteen feet from the ground.
The main force of the explosion was directed downwards.
Where, a second earlier, there had been a squad of InfiniDim Enterprises executives with a rocket launcher standing on an elegant terraced plaza paved with large slabs of lustrous stone cut from the ancient alabastrum quarries of Zentalquabula there was now, instead, a bit of a pit with nasty bits in it.
A great wump of hot air welled up from the explosion throwing Ford and Colin violently up into the sky.
Ford fought desperately and blindly to hold on and failed.
He turned helplessly upwards through the sky, reached the peak of a parabola, paused and then started to fall again.
He fell and fell and fell and suddenly winded himself badly on Colin, who was still rising.
He clasped himself desperately on to the small spherical robot.
Colin slewed wildly through the air towards the tower of the Guide offices, trying delightedly to control himself and slow down.
The world span sickeningly round Ford's head as they span and twisted round each other and then, equally sickeningly, everything suddenly stopped.
Ford found himself deposited dizzily on a window ledge.
His towel fell past and he grabbed at it and caught it.
Colin bobbed in the air inches away from him.
Ford looked around himself in a bruised, bleeding and breath-less daze.
The ledge was only about a foot wide and he was perched precariously on it, thirteen stories up.
Thirteen.
He knew they were thirteen stories up because the windows were dark.
He was bitterly upset.
He had bought those shoes for some absurd price in a store on the Lower East Side in New York.
Damn everything.
And now one of the shoes was gone.
He threw his head back and stared at the sky.
It wouldn't be such a grim tragedy if the planet in question hadn't been demolished, which meant that he wouldn't even be able to get another pair.
Yes, given the infinite sideways extension of probability there was, of course, an almost infinite multiplicity of planets Earth, but, when you came down to it, a major pair of shoes wasn't something you could just replace by mucking about in multi-dimensional space/time.
He sighed.
Oh well, he'd better make the best of it.
At least it had saved his life.
For the time being.
He was perched on a foot-wide ledge thirteen stories up the side of a building and he wasn't at all sure that that was worth a good shoe.
He stared in woozily through the darkened glass.
It was as dark and silent as the tomb.
No.
That was a ridiculous thing to think.
He'd been to some great parties in tombs.
Could he detect some movement?
He wasn't quite sure.
It seemed that he could see some kind of weird, flapping shadow.
Perhaps it was just blood dribbling over his eyelashes.
He wiped it away.
Boy, he'd love to have a farm somewhere, keep some sheep.
He peered into the window again, trying to make out what the shape was, but he had the feeling, so common in today's universe, that he was looking into some kind of optical illusion and that his eyes were just playing silly buggers with him.
Was there a bird of some kind in there?
Was that what they had hidden away up here on a concealed floor behind darkened, rocket- proof glass?
Someone's aviary?
There was certainly something flapping about in there, but it seemed like not so much a bird, more a kind of bird-shaped hole in space.
He closed his eyes, which he'd been wanting to do for a bit anyway.
He wondered what the hell to do next.
Jump?
Climb?
He didn't think there was going to be any way of breaking in.
OK, the supposedly rocket-proof glass hadn't stood up, when it came to it, to an actual rocket, but then that had been a rocket that had been fired at very short range from inside, which probably wasn't what the engineers who designed it had had in mind.
It didn't mean he was going to be able to break the window here by wrapping his fist in his towel and punching.
What the hell, he tried it anyway and hurt his fist.
It was just as well he couldn't get a good swing from where he was sitting or he might have hurt it quite badly.
The building had been sturdily reinforced when it was completely rebuilt after the Frogstar attack, and was probably the most heavily armoured publishing company in the business, but there was always, he thought, some weakness in any system designed by a corporate committee.
He had already found one of them.
The engineers who designed the windows had not expected them to be hit by a rocket from short range from the inside, so the window had failed.
So, what would the engineers not be expecting someone sitting on the ledge outside the window to do?
He wracked his brains for a moment or so before he got it.
The thing they wouldn't be expecting him to do was to be there in the first place.
Only an absolute idiot would be sitting where he was, so he was winning already.
A common mistake that people make when trying to design something completely foolproof is to underestimate the ingenuity of complete fools.
He pulled his newly acquired credit card from his pocket, slid it into a crack where the window met its surrounding frame, and did something a rocket would not have been able to do.
He wiggled it around a bit.
He felt a catch slip.
He slid the window open and almost fell backwards off the ledge laughing, giving thanks as he did so for the Great Ventilation and Telephone Riots of SrDt 3454.
The Great Ventilation and Telephone Riots of SrDt 3454 had started off as just a lot of hot air.
Hot air was, of course, the problem that ventilation was supposed to solve and generally it had solved the problem reasonably well up to the point when someone invented air- conditioning, which solved the problem far more throbbingly.
And that was all well and good provided you could stand the noise and the dribbling until someone else came up with something even sexier and smarter than air-conditioning which was called in-building climate control.
Now this was quite something.
The major differences from just ordinary air-conditioning were that it was thrillingly more expensive, involved a huge amount of sophisticated measuring and regulating equipment which was far better at knowing, moment by moment, what kind of air people wanted to breathe than mere people did.
It also meant that, to be sure that mere people didn't muck up the sophisticated calculations which the system was making on their behalf, all the windows in the buildings were built sealed shut.
This is true.
One of the smartest features of the Breathe-o-Smart is that it cannot possibly go wrong.
So.
No worries on that score.
It doesn't matter how small the object is, the designers of the object have got to find a way of squeezing the legend in somewhere, because it is their attention which is being drawn to it rather than necessarily that of the user's.
Major heat waves started to coincide, with almost magical precision, with major failures of the Breathe-o-Smart systems.
To begin with this merely caused simmering resentment and only a few deaths from asphyxiation.
The real horror erupted on the day that three events happened simultaneously.
The first event was that Breathe-o-Smart Inc. issued a statement to the effect that best results were achieved by using their systems in temperate climates.
I don't care what number you want, what extension you're calling from.
Go and stick a firework up your bottom!
Yeeehaah!
Hoo Hoo Hoo!
Velooooom!
Another, unexpected result was a dramatic lowering of the suicide rate.
All sorts of stressed and rising executives who had been forced, during the dark days of the Breathe-o-Smart tyranny, to jump in front of trains or stab themselves, could now just clamber out on to their own window ledges and leap off at their leisure.
What frequently happened, though, was that in the moment or two they had to look around and gather their thoughts they would suddenly discover that all they had really needed was a breath of air and a fresh perspective on things, and maybe also a farm on which they could keep a few sheep.
Another completely unlooked for result was that Ford Prefect, stranded thirteen stories up a heavily armoured building armed with nothing but a towel and a credit card was nevertheless able to clamber through a supposedly rocket-proof window to safety.
He closed the window neatly after him, having first allowed Colin to follow him through, and then started to look around for this bird thing.
The thing he realised about the windows was this: because they had been converted into openable windows after they had first been designed to be impregnable, they were, in fact, much less secure than if they had been designed as openable windows in the first place.
Hey ho, it's a funny old life, he was just thinking to himself, when he suddenly realised that the room he had gone to all this trouble to break into was not a very interesting one.
He stopped in surprise.
Where was the strange flapping shape?
Where was anything that was worth all this palaver-the extraordinary veil of secrecy that seemed to lie over this room and the equally extraordinary sequence of events that had seemed to conspire to get him into it?
The room, like every other room in this building now, was done out in some appallingly tasteful grey.
There were a few charts and drawings on the wall.
Most of them were meaningless to Ford, but then he came across something that was obviously a mock-up for a poster of some kind.
No more information than that.
Ford looked around again.
Then his attention was gradually drawn to Colin, the absurdly over-happy security robot, who was cowering in a corner of the room gibbering with what seemed strangely like fear.
Odd, thought Ford.
He looked around to see what it was that Colin might have been reacting to.
Then he saw something that he hadn't noticed before, lying quietly on top of a workbench.
It was circular and black and about the size of a small side plate.
Its top and its bottom were smoothly convex so that it resembled a small lightweight throwing discus.
Its surfaces seemed to be completely smooth, unbroken and featureless.
It was doing nothing.
Then Ford noticed that there was something written on it.
Strange.
There hadn't been anything written on it a moment ago and now suddenly there was.
There just didn't seem to have been any observable transition between the two states.
All it said, in small, alarming letters was a single word: PANIC A moment ago there hadn't been any marks or cracks in its surface.
Now there were.
They were growing.
Panic, the Guide Mk II said.
Ford begin to do as he was told.
He had just remembered why the slug-like creatures looked familiar.
Their colour scheme was a kind of corporate grey, but in all other respects they looked exactly like Vogons.
Chapter 13 The ship dropped quietly to land on the edge of the wide clearing, a hundred yards or so from the village.
It arrived suddenly and unexpectedly but with a minimum of fuss.
One moment it was a perfectly ordinary late afternoon in the early autumn - the leaves were just beginning to turn red and gold, the river was beginning to swell again with the rains from the mountains in the north, the plumage of the pikka birds was beginning to thicken in anticipation of the coming winter frosts, any day now the Perfectly Normal Beasts would start their thunderous migration across the plains, and Old Thrashbarg was beginning to mutter to himself as he hobbled his way around the village, a muttering which meant that he was rehearsing and elaborating the stories that he would tell of the past year once the evenings had drawn in and people had no choice but to gather round the fire and listen to him and grumble and say that that wasn't how they remembered it - and the next moment there was a spaceship sitting there, gleaming in the warm autumn sun.
It hummed for a bit and then stopped.
It wasn't a big spaceship.
If the villagers had been experts on spaceships they would have known at once that it was a pretty nifty one, a small sleek Hrundi four-berth runabout with just about every optional extra in the brochure except Advanced Vectoid Stabilisis, which only wimps went for.
You can't get a good tight, sharp curve round a tri-lateral time axis with Advanced Vectoid Stabilisis.
All right, it's a bit safer, but it makes the handling go all soggy.
The villagers didn't know all that, of course.
Most of them here on the remote planet of Lamuella had never seen a spaceship, certainly not one that was all in one piece, and as it shone warmly in the evening light it was just the most extraordinary thing they had come across since the day Kirp caught a fish with a head at both ends.
Everybody had fallen silent.
Whereas a moment before two or three dozen people had been wandering about, chattering, chopping wood, carrying water, teasing the pikka birds, or just amiably trying to stay out of Old Thrashbarg's way, suddenly all activity died away and everybody turned to look at the strange object in amazement.
Or, not quite everybody.
The pikka birds tended to be amazed by completely different things.
A perfectly ordinary leaf lying unexpectedly on a stone would cause them to skitter off in paroxysms of confusion; sunrise took them completely by surprise every morning, but the arrival of an alien craft from another world simply failed to engage any part of their attention.
They continued to kar and rit and huk as they pecked for seeds on the ground; the river continued with its quiet, spacious burbling.
Also, the noise of loud and tuneless singing from the last hut on the left continued unabated.
Suddenly, with a slight click and a hum, a door folded itself outwards and downwards from the spaceship.
Then, for a minute or two, nothing further seemed to happen, other than the loud singing from the last hut on the left, and the thing just sat there.
Some of the villagers, particularly the boys, began to edge forward a little bit to have a closer look.
Old Thrashbarg tried to shoo them back.
This was exactly the sort of thing that Old Thrashbarg didn't like to have happening.
He hadn't foretold it, not even slightly, and even though he would be able to wrestle the whole thing into his continuing story somehow or other, it really was all getting a bit much to deal with.
He strode forward, pushed the boys back, and raised his arms and his ancient knobbly staff into the air.
The long warm light of the evening sun caught him nicely.
He prepared to welcome whatever gods these were as if he had been expecting them all along.
Still nothing happened.
Gradually it became clear that there was some kind of argument going on inside the craft.
Time went by and Old Thrashbarg's arms were beginning to ache.
Suddenly the ramp folded itself back up again.
That made it easy for Thrashbarg.
They were demons and he had repulsed them.
The reason he hadn't foretold it was that prudence and modesty forbade.
Almost immediately a different ramp folded itself out on the other side of the craft from where Thrashbarg was standing, and two figures at last emerged on it, still arguing with each other and ignoring everybody, even Thrashbarg, whom they wouldn't even have noticed from where they were standing.
Old Thrashbarg chewed angrily on his beard.
To continue to stand there with his arms upraised?
To kneel with his head bowed forward and his staff held out pointing at them?
To fall backwards as if overcome in some titanic inner struggle?
Perhaps just to go off to the woods and live in a tree for a year without speaking to anyone?
He opted just to drop his arms smartly as if he had done what he meant to do.
They were really hurting so he didn't have much choice.
He made a small, secret sign he had just invented towards the ramp which had closed and then made three and a half steps backwards, so he could at least get a good look at whoever these people were and then decide what to do next.
The taller one was a very good looking woman wearing soft and crumply clothes.
Old Thrashbarg didn't know this, but they were made of RymplonTM, a new synthetic fabric which was terrific for space travel because it looked its absolute best when it was all creased and sweaty.
The shorter one was a girl.
She was awkward and sullen looking, and was wearing clothes which looked their absolute worst when they were all creased and sweaty, and what was more she almost certainly knew it.
All eyes watched them, except for the pikka birds, which had their own things to watch.
The woman stood and looked around her.
She had a purposeful air about her.
There was obviously something in particular she wanted, but she didn't know exactly where to find it.
She glanced from face to face among the villagers assembled curiously around her without apparently seeing what she was looking for.
Thrashbarg had no idea how to play this at all, and decided to resort to chanting.
He threw back his head and began to wail, but was instantly interrupted by a fresh outbreak of song from the hut of the Sandwich Maker: the last one on the left.
The woman looked round sharply, and gradually a smile came over her face.
Without so much as a glance at Old Thrashbarg she started to walk towards the hut.
There is an art to the business of making sandwiches which it is given to few ever to find the time to explore in depth.
It is a simple task, but the opportunities for satisfaction are many and profound: choosing the right bread for instance.
The Sandwich Maker had spent many months in daily consultation and experiment with Grarp the baker and eventually they had between them created a loaf of exactly the consistency that was dense enough to slice thinly and neatly, while still being light, moist and having that fine nutty flavour which best enhanced the savour of roast Perfectly Normal Beast flesh.
There was also the geometry of the slice to be refined: the precise relationships between the width and height of the slice and also its thickness which would give the proper sense of bulk and weight to the finished sandwich: here again, lightness was a virtue, but so too were firmness, generosity and that promise of succulence and savour that is the hallmark of a truly intense sandwich experience.
The proper tools, of course, were crucial, and many were the days that the Sandwich Maker, when not engaged with the Baker at his oven, would spend with Strinder the Tool Maker, weighing and balancing knives, taking them to the forge and back again.
Suppleness, strength, keenness of edge, length and balance were all enthusiastically debated, theories put forward, tested, refined, and many was the evening when the Sandwich Maker and the Tool Maker could be seen silhouetted against the light of the setting sun and the Tool Maker's forge making slow sweeping movements through the air trying one knife after another, comparing the weight of this one with the balance of another, the suppleness of a third and the handle binding of a fourth.
Three knives altogether were required.
First there was the knife for the slicing of the bread: a firm, authoritative blade which imposed a clear and defining will on a loaf.
Then there was the butter-spreading knife, which was a whippy little number but still with a firm backbone to it.
Early versions had been a little too whippy, but now the combination of flexibility with a core of strength was exactly right to achieve the maximum smoothness and grace of spread.
The chief amongst the knives, of course, was the carving knife.
This was the knife that would not merely impose its will on the medium through which it moved, as did the bread knife; it must work with it, be Guided by the grain of the meat, to achieve slices of the most exquisite consistency and translucency, that would slide away in filmy folds from the main hunk of meat.
The Sandwich Maker would then flip each sheet with a smooth flick of the wrist on to the beautifully proportioned lower bread slice, trim it with four deft strokes and then at last perform the magic that the children of the village so longed to gather round and watch with rapt attention and wonder.
With just four more dexterous flips of the knife he would assemble the trimmings into a perfectly fitting jigsaw of pieces on top of the primary slice.
For every sandwich the size and shape of the trimmings were different, but the Sandwich Maker would always effortlessly and without hesitation assemble them into a pattern which fitted perfectly.
A second layer of meat and a second layer of trimmings, and the main act of creation would be accomplished.
The Sandwich Maker would pass what he had made to his assistant who would then add a few slices of newcumber and fladish and a touch of splagberry sauce, and then apply the topmost layer of bread and cut the sandwich with a fourth and altogether plainer knife.
It was not that these were not also skillful operations, but they were lesser skills to be performed by a dedicated apprentice who would one day, when the Sandwich Maker finally laid down his tools, take over from him.
It was an exalted position and that apprentice, Drimple, was the envy of his fellows.
There were those in the village who were happy chopping wood, those who were content carrying water, but to be the Sandwich Maker was very heaven.
And so the Sandwich Maker sang as he worked.
He was using the last of the year's salted meat.
It was a little past its best now, but still the rich savour of Perfectly Normal Beast meat was something unsurpassed in any of the Sandwich Maker's previous experience.
Next week it was anticipated that the Perfectly Normal Beasts would appear again for their regular migration, whereupon the whole village would once again be plunged into frenetic action: hunting the Beasts, killing perhaps six, maybe even seven dozen of the thousands that thundered past.
Then the Beasts must be rapidly butchered and cleaned, with most of the meat salted to keep it through the winter months until the return migration in the spring, which would replenish their supplies.
The very best of the meat would be roasted straight away for the feast that marked the Autumn Passage.
The celebrations would last for three days of sheer exuberance, dancing and stories that Old Thrashbarg would tell of how the hunt had gone, stories that he would have been busy sitting making up in his hut while the rest of the village was out doing the actual hunting.
And then the very, very best of the meat would be saved from the feast and delivered cold to the Sandwich Maker.
And the Sandwich Maker would exercise on it the skills that he had brought to them from the gods, and make the exquisite Sandwiches of the Third Season, of which the whole village would partake before beginning, the next day, to prepare themselves for the rigours of the coming winter.
Today he was just making ordinary sandwiches, if such delicacies, so lovingly crafted, could ever be called ordinary.
Today his assistant was away so the Sandwich Maker was applying his own garnish, which he was happy to do.
He was happy with just about everything in fact.
He sliced, he sang.
He flipped each slice of meat neatly on to a slice of bread, trimmed it and assembled all the trimmings into their jigsaw.
A little salad, a little sauce, another slice of bread, another sandwich, another verse of Yellow Submarine.
The Sandwich Maker almost sliced his thumb off.
The villagers had watched in consternation as the woman had marched boldly to the hut of the Sandwich Maker.
The Sandwich Maker had been sent to them by Almighty Bob in a burning fiery chariot.
This, at least, was what Thrashbarg said, and Thrashbarg was the authority on these things.
So, at least, Thrashbarg claimed, and Thrashbarg was... and so on and so on.
It was hardly worth arguing about.
A few villagers wondered why Almighty Bob would send his onlie begotten Sandwich Maker in a burning fiery chariot rather than perhaps in one that might have landed quietly without destroying half the forest, filling it with ghosts and also injuring the Sandwich Maker quite badly.
Old Thrashbarg said that it was the ineffable will of Bob, and when they asked him what ineffable meant he said look it up.
This was a problem because Old Thrashbarg had the only dictionary and he wouldn't let them borrow it.
They asked him why not and he said that it was not for them to know the will of Almighty Bob, and when they asked him why not again he said because he said so.
At least they had got the sandwiches.
One day Old Thrashbarg said that Almighty Bob had decreed that he, Thrashbarg, was to have first pick of the sandwiches.
The villagers asked him when this had happened, exactly, and Thrashbarg said it had happened yesterday, when they weren't looking.
They let him have first pick of the sandwiches.
It seemed easiest.
And now this woman had just arrived out of nowhere, and gone straight for the Sandwich Maker's hut.
His fame had obviously spread, though it was hard to know where to since, according to Old Thrashbarg, there wasn't anywhere else.
Anyway, wherever it was she had come from, presumably somewhere ineffable, she was here now and was in the Sandwich Maker's hut.
Who was she?
And who was the strange girl who was hanging around outside the hut moodily and kicking at stones and showing every sign of not wanting to be there?
It seemed odd that someone should come all the way from somewhere ineffable in a chariot that was obviously a vast improvement on the burning fiery one which had brought them the Sandwich Maker, if she didn't even want to be here?
They all looked to Thrashbarg, but he was on his knees mumbling and looking very firmly up into the sky and not catching anybody else's eye until he'd thought of something.
Who...?
When...?
It was neatly laid out with his kitchen utensils.
There were some fairly basic cupboards and shelves, and a basic bed in the corner.
A door at the back of the room led to something Trillian couldn't see because the door was closed.
She couldn't quite make out what the set-up was.
I don't know when I've ever been anywhere nicer.
I'm happy here.
They like me, I make sandwiches for them, and... er, well that's it really.
It really is.
I don't expect you'd like it very much, but for me it's, well, it's perfect.
Look, sit down, please, make yourself comfortable.
Trillian picked up a sandwich and looked at it.
She sniffed it carefully.
Trillian took a nibble, then a bite and munched on it thoughtfully.
He was used to being revered a bit, and was having to go through some unexpected mental gear changes.
It's a bit like a cow, or rather a bull.
Kind of like a buffalo in fact.
Tricia frowned, and stopped chewing.
She wasn't going to swallow until she knew.
It's all right, it's perfectly safe to swallow.
I've eaten tons of it.
It's great.
Very succulent.
Very tender.
Trillian still hadn't swallowed.
They're the big ones behind us here, you must have seen them as you came in, and then they sweep in their thousands across the great Anhondo plains and, er, well that's it really.
That's where they come from.
Trillian frowned.
There was something she wasn't quite getting about this.
Then they sweep across the Anhondo plains and, well, vanish really.
We have about six days to catch as many of them as we can before they disappear.
Reluctantly, Trillian swallowed.
It was either that or spit it out, and it did in fact taste pretty good.
I think Old Thrashbarg called them that.
Astounding how hard it was to think of anything to say to someone after all this time.
That's terrific.
Very exciting.
Well done.
Arthur was astonished.
It's a whole complicated insurance thing.
They just bury the whole thing.
Pretend it never happened.
The insurance business is completely screwy now.
Trillian frowned.
Arthur tried to understand this remark.
He found it often took a moment or so before he saw exactly what it was that people were driving at, so he let a moment or two pass at a leisurely rate.
Life was so pleasant and relaxed these days, there was time to let things sink in.
He let it sink in.
He still didn't quite understand what she meant, though, so in the end he had to say so.
Trillian gave him a cool smile and then turned back to the door of the hut.
Chapter 14 As the Guide folded itself back into a smooth, dark disk.
Ford realised some pretty hectic stuff.
Or at least he tried to realise it, but it was too hectic to take in all in one go.
His head was hammering, his ankle was hurting, and though he didn't like to be a wimp about his ankle, he always found that intense multi-dimensional logic was something he understood best in the bath.
He needed time to think about this.
Time, a tall drink, and some kind of rich, foamy oil.
He had to get out of here.
He had to get the Guide out of here.
He didn't think they'd make it together.
He glanced wildly round the room.
Think, think, think.
It had to be something simple and obvious.
If he was right in his nasty lurking suspicion that he was dealing with nasty, lurking Vogons, then the more simple and obvious the better.
Suddenly he saw what he needed.
He wouldn't try to beat the system, he would just use it.
The frightening thing about the Vogons was their absolute mindless determination to do whatever mindless thing it was they were determined to do.
There was never any point in trying to appeal to their reason because they didn't have any.
However, if you kept your nerve you could sometimes exploit their blinkered, bludgeoning insistence on being bludgeoning and blinkered.
It wasn't merely that their left hand didn't always know what their right hand was doing, so to speak; quite often their right hand had a pretty hazy notion as well.
Did he dare just post the thing to himself?
Did he dare just put it in the system and let the Vogons work out how to get the thing to him while at the same time they were busy, as they probably would be, tearing the building apart to find out where he'd hidden it?
Yes.
Feverishly, he packed it.
He wrapped it.
He labelled it.
With a moment's pause to wonder if he was really doing the right thing, he committed the package to the building's internal mail chute.
They'll probably incinerate you when they find you, and I won't be here to help.
It will be very, very nasty for you, and that's just too bad.
Colin obediently dived down the mail chute in pursuit of his charge.
Now Ford had only himself to worry about, but that was still quite a substantial worry.
There were noises of heavy running footsteps outside the door, which he had taken the precaution of locking and shifting a large filing cabinet in front of.
He was worried that everything had gone so smoothly.
Everything had fitted terribly well.
He had hurtled through the day with reckless abandon and yet everything had worked out with uncanny neatness.
Except for his shoe.
He was bitter about his shoe.
That was an account that was going to have to be settled.
With a deafening roar the door exploded inwards.
In the turmoil of smoke and dust he could see large, slug-like creatures hurrying through.
So everything was going well was it?
Everything was working out as if the most extraordinary luck was on his side?
Well, he'd see about that.
In a spirit of scientific enquiry he hurled himself out of the window again.
Chapter 15 The first month, getting to know each other, was a little difficult.
The second month, trying to come to terms with what they'd got to know about each other in the first month, was much easier.
The third month, when the box arrived, was very tricky indeed.
At the beginning, it was a problem even trying to explain what a month was.
This had been a pleasantly simple matter for Arthur, here on Lamuella.
The days were just a little over twenty-five hours long, which basically meant an extra hour in bed every single day and, of course, having regularly to reset his watch, which Arthur rather enjoyed doing.
He also felt at home with the number of suns and moons which Lamuella had - one of each - as opposed to some of the planets he'd fetched up on from time to time which had had ridiculous numbers of them.
The planet orbited its single sun every three hundred days, which was a good number because it meant the year didn't drag by.
The moon orbited Lamuella just over nine times a year, which meant that a month was a little over thirty days, which was absolutely perfect because it gave you a little more time to get things done in.
It was not merely reassuringly like Earth, it was actually rather an improvement.
Random, on the other hand, thought she was trapped in a recurring nightmare.
She would have crying fits and think the moon was out to get her.
Every night it was there, and then, when it went, the sun came out and followed her.
Over and over again.
Trillian had warned Arthur that Random might have some difficulty in adjusting to a more regular lifestyle than she had been used to up till now, but Arthur hadn't been ready for actual howling at the moon.
He hadn't been ready for any of this of course.
His daughter?
His daughter?
He and Trillian had never even - had they?
He was absolutely convinced he would have remembered.
What about Zaphod?
It was only later that it dawned on me.
I double checked and I was right.
Arthur had asked, pop-eyed.
But she wasn't quite as random as her name suggests, because, of course, you were the only homo sapiens donor.
Arthur had stared wide-eyed at the unhappy looking girl who was slouching awkwardly in the door-frame looking at him.
I spend my life going backwards and forwards in time, you see.
The job.
I used to take her with me when I could, but it just wasn't always possible.
Then I used to put her into day care time zones, but you just can't get reliable time tracking now.
You leave them there in the morning, you've simply no idea how old they'll be in the evening.
You complain till you're blue in the face but it doesn't get you anywhere.
I left her at one of the places for a few hours once, and when I came back she'd passed puberty.
I've done all I can, Arthur, it's over to you.
The ten seconds that passed after Trillian left were about the longest of Arthur Dent's life.
Time, we know, is relative.
You can travel light years through the stars and back, and if you do it at the speed of light then, when you return, you may have aged mere seconds while your twin brother or sister will have aged twenty, thirty, forty or however many years it is, depending on how far you travelled.
This will come to you as a profound personal shock, particularly if you didn't know you had a twin brother or sister.
The seconds that you have been absent for will not have been sufficient time to prepare you for the shock of new and strangely distended family relationships when you return.
Ten seconds silence was not enough time for Arthur to reassemble his whole view of himself and his life in a way that suddenly included an entire new daughter of whose merest existence he had had not the slightest inkling of a suspicion when he had woken that morning.
Deep, emotional family ties cannot be constructed in ten seconds, however far and fast you travel away from them, and Arthur could only feel helpless, bewildered and numb as he looked at the girl standing in his doorway, staring at his floor.
He supposed that there was no point in pretending not to be hopeless.
He walked over and he hugged her.
I don't even know you yet.
We live in strange times.
We also live in strange places: each in a universe of our own.
The people with whom we populate our universes are the shadows of whole other universes intersecting with our own.
Nice tan.
So give your kid a break, OK?
Extract from Practical Parenting in a Fractally Demented Universe.
Arthur had almost given up.
That is to say, he was not going to give up.
He was absolutely not going to give up.
Not now.
Not ever.
But if he had been the sort of person who was going to give up, this was probably the time he would have done it.
Not content with being surly, bad-tempered, wanting to go and play in the paleozoic era, not seeing why they had to have the gravity on the whole time and shouting at the sun to stop following her.
Random had also used his carving knife to dig up stones to throw at the pikka birds for looking at her like that.
Arthur didn't even know if Lamuella had had a paleozoic era.
He sighed as he sat nursing the chipped and bent knife.
He was going to love her if it killed him, or her, or both.
It wasn't easy being a father.
He knew that no one had ever said it was going to be easy, but that wasn't the point because he'd never asked about being one in the first place.
He was doing his best.
Every moment that he could wrest away from making sandwiches he was spending with her, talking to her, walking with her, sitting on the hill with her watching the sun go down over he valley in which the village nestled, trying to find out about her life, trying to explain to her about his.
It was a tricky business.
The common ground between them, apart from the fact that they had almost identical genes, was about the size of a pebble.
Or rather, it was about the size of Trillian and of her they had slightly differing views.
He suddenly realised she had been talking to him and he hadn't noticed.
Or rather he had not recognized her voice.
Instead of the usual tone of voice in which she spoke to him, which was bitter and truculent, she was just asking him a simple question.
He looked round in surprise.
She was sitting there on a stool in the corner of the hut in that rather hunched way she had, knees together, feet splayed out, with her dark hair hanging down over her face as she looked at something she had cradled in her hands.
Arthur went over to her, a little nervously.
Her mood swings were very unpredictable but so far they'd all been between different types of bad ones.
Outbreaks of bitter recrimination would give way without warning to abject self-pity and then long bouts of sullen despair which were punctuated with sudden acts of mindless violence against inanimate objects and demands to go to electric clubs.
Not only were there no electric clubs on Lamuella, there were no clubs at all and, in fact, no electricity.
There was a forge and a bakery, a few carts and a well, but those were the high water mark of Lamuellan technology, and a fair number of Random's unquenchable rages were directed against the sheer incomprehensible backwardness of the place.
She could pick up Sub-Etha TV on a small Flex-O-Panel which had been surgically implanted in her wrist, but that didn't cheer her up at all because it was full of news of insanely exciting things happening in every other part of the Galaxy than here.
It would also give her frequent news of her mother, who had dumped her to go off and cover some war which now seemed not to have happened, or at least to have gone all wrong in some way because of the absence of any proper intelligence gathering.
It also gave her access to lots of great adventure shows featuring all sorts of fantastically expensive spaceships crashing into each other.
The villagers were absolutely hypnotised by all these wonderful magic images flashing over her wrist.
They had only ever seen one spaceship crash, and it had been so frightening, violent and shocking and had caused so much horrible devastation, fire and death that, stupidly, they had never realised it was entertainment.
Old Thrashbarg had been so astonished by it that he had instantly seen Random as an emissary from Bob, but had fairly soon afterwards decided that in fact she had been sent as a test of his faith, if not of his patience.
He was also alarmed at the number of spaceship crashes he had to start incorporating into his holy stories if he was to hold the attention of the villagers, and not have them rushing off to peer at Random's wrist all the time.
At the moment she was not peering at her wrist.
Her wrist was turned off.
Arthur squatted down quietly beside her to see what she was looking at.
It was his watch.
He had taken it off when he'd gone to shower under the local waterfall, and Random had found it and was trying to work it out.
She brought up the display on her wrist panel, which automatically produced a readout of local time.
Her wrist panel had quietly got on with the business of measuring the local gravity and orbital momentum, and had noticed where the sun was and tracked its movement in the sky, all within the first few minutes of Random's arrival.
It had then quickly picked up clues from its environment as to what the local unit conventions were and reset itself appropriately.
It did this sort of thing continually, which was particularly valuable if you did a lot of travelling in time as well as space.
Random frowned at her father's watch, which didn't do any of this.
Arthur was very fond of it.
It was a better one than he would ever have afforded himself.
He had been given it on his twenty-second birthday by a rich and guilt-ridden godfather who had forgotten every single birthday he had had up till then, and also his name.
The watch had been through a considerable amount of stuff in the last few years, most of which would fall well outside the warranty.
He didn't suppose, of course, that the warranty had especially mentioned that the watch was guaranteed to be accurate only within the very particular gravitational and magnetic fields of the Earth, and so long as the day was twenty-four hours long and the planet didn't explode and so on.
These were such basic assumptions that even the lawyers would have missed them.
Luckily his watch was a wind-up one, or at least, a self-winder.
Nowhere else in the Galaxy would he have found batteries of precisely the dimensions and power specifications that were perfectly standard on Earth.
Arthur took it from her.
In the little window on the right it says THU, which means Thursday, and the number is 14, which means it's the fourteenth day of the month of MAY which is what it says in this window over here.
Random took the watch back from him and looked at it again, clearly baffled by something.
Then she held it up to her ear and listened in puzzlement.
That's the mechanism that drives the watch.
It's called clockwork.
Random carried on peering at it.
Arthur suggested they went for a walk.
He felt there were things they should discuss, and for once Random seemed, if not precisely amenable and willing, then at least not growling.
From Random's point of view this was also all very weird.
It wasn't that she wanted to be difficult, as such, it was just that she didn't know how or what else to be.
Who was this guy?
What was this life she was supposed to lead?
What was this world she was supposed to lead it in?
And what was this universe that kept coming at her through her eyes and ears?
What was it for?
What did it want?
She'd been born in a spaceship that had been going from somewhere to somewhere else, and when it had got to somewhere else, somewhere else had only turned out to be another somewhere that you had to get to somewhere else again from, and so on.
It was her normal expectation that she was supposed to be somewhere else.
It was normal for her to feel that she was in the wrong place.
Then, constant time travel had only compounded this problem, and had led to the feeling that she was not only always in the wrong place, but she was also almost always there at the wrong time.
She didn't notice that she felt this, because it was the only way she ever felt, just as it never seemed odd to her that nearly everywhere she went she needed either to wear weights or anti-gravity suits and usually special apparatus for breathing as well.
The only places you could ever feel right were worlds you designed for yourself to inhabit- virtual realities in the electric clubs.
It had never occurred to her that the real Universe was something you could actually fit into.
And that included this Lamuella place her mother had dumped her in.
And it also included this person who had bestowed on her this precious and magical gift of life in return for a seat upgrade.
It was just as well he had turned out to be rather kind and friendly or there would have been trouble.
Really.
She'd got a specially sharpened stone in her pocket she could cause a lot of trouble with.
It can be very dangerous to see things from somebody else's point of view without the proper training.
They sat on the spot that Arthur particularly liked, on the side of a hill overlooking the valley.
The sun was going down over the village.
The only thing that Arthur wasn't quite so fond of was being able to see a little way into the next valley, where a deep dark mangled furrow in the forest marked the spot where his ship had crashed.
But maybe that was what kept bringing him back here.
There were plenty of spots from which you could survey the lush rolling countryside of Lamuella, but this was the one he was drawn to, with its nagging dark spot of fear and pain nestling just on the edge of his vision.
He had never been there again since he had been pulled out of the wreckage.
Wouldn't.
Couldn't bear it.
In fact he had gone some of the way back to it the very next day, while he was still numb and spinning with shock.
He had a broken leg, a couple of broken ribs, some bad burns and was not really thinking coherently but had insisted that the villagers take him, which, uneasily, they had.
He had not managed to get right to the actual spot where the ground had bubbled and melted, however, and had at last hobbled away from the horror for ever.
Soon, word had got around that the whole area was haunted and no one had ventured back there ever since.
The land was full of beautiful, verdant and delightful valleys - no point in going to a highly worrying one.
Let the past hold on to itself and let the present move forward into the future.
Random cradled the watch in her hands, slowly turning it to let the long light of the evening sun shine warmly in the scratches and scuffs of the thick glass.
It fascinated her watching the spidery little second hand ticking its way round.
Every time it completed a full circle, the longer of the two main hands had moved on exactly to the next of the sixty small divisions round the dial.
And when the long hand had made its own full circle, the smaller hand had moved on to the next of the main digits.
She smiled with a deep and mysterious pleasure and moved very slightly so that she was resting just a little.
Against his arm.
Arthur felt a small sigh escape from him that had been pent up inside his chest for weeks.
He wanted to put his arm around his daughter's shoulders, but felt it was too early yet and that she would shy away from him.
But something was working.
Something was easing inside her.
The watch meant something to her that nothing in her life had so far managed to do.
Arthur was not sure that he had really understood what it was yet, but he was profoundly pleased and relieved that something had reached her.
It became finer and finer and more and more intricate.
It was highly skilled and delicate work.
It was never expected to go anywhere else and deal with different suns and moons and magnetic fields and things.
That's where these were made.
Small hilly country.
Tiresomely neat.
We evolved on the Earth.
Random suddenly leaped to her feet, shouting.
You don't understand me, you don't understand anything!
She started to run hectically down the hill, still clutching the watch and shouting that she hated him.
Arthur jumped up, startled and at a loss.
Fie started to run after her through the stringy and clumpy grass.
It was hard and painful for him.
When he had broken his leg in the crash, it had not been a clean break, and it had not healed cleanly.
He was stumbling and wincing as he ran.
Suddenly she turned and faced him, her face dark with anger.
She brandished the watch at him.
Somewhere it works?
She turned and ran again.
She was fit and fleet-footed and Arthur could not remotely keep up with her.
It wasn't that he had not expected being a father to be this difficult, it was that he hadn't expected to be a father at all, particularly not suddenly and unexpectedly on an alien planet.
Random turned to shout at him again.
For some reason he stopped each time she did.
Who do you think Mum thought I was?
Shut up!
Please tell me!
She wished she hadn't gone off with that stupid brain-dead fruit gum, Zaphod!
That was my job.
But I fitted even worse than she did!
She's fantastically successful, isn't she?
Stupid!
Stupid!
Random turned and ran off again.
Arthur couldn't keep up with her and at last he had to sit down for a bit and let the pain in his leg subside.
The turmoil in his head he didn't know what to do with at all.
He hobbled into the village an hour later.
It was getting dark.
The villagers he passed said hello, but there was a sense of nervousness and of not quite knowing what was going on or what to do about it in the air.
Old Thrashbarg had been seen pulling on his beard a fair bit and looking at the moon, and that was not a good sign either.
Arthur went into his hut.
Random was sitting hunched quietly over the table.
Arthur went up to her and put his arm round her shoulder.
She didn't resist or pull away.
Then Arthur saw what it was she was so sorry about.
In the pool of light thrown by a Lamuellan lantern lay Arthur's watch.
Random had forced the back off it with the back edge of the butter spreading knife, and all of the minute cogs and springs and levers were lying in a tiny cock-eyed mess where she'd been fiddling with them.
I'm so sorry!
I can't get it back together.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
I'm sorry.
I don't know what to do.
I'll get it repaired!
Really!
The following day Thrashbarg came round and said all sorts of Bob stuff.
He tried to exert a calming influence by inviting Random to let her mind dwell on the ineffable mystery of the giant earwig, and Random said there was no giant earwig and Thrashbarg went very cold and silent and said she would be cast into outer darkness.
Random said good, she'd been born there, and the next day the parcel arrived.
This was all getting a bit eventful.
In fact, when the parcel arrived, delivered by a kind of robot drone that dropped out of the sky making droning robot noises, it brought with it a sense which gradually began to permeate through the whole village, that it was almost one event too many.
It wasn't the robot drone's fault.
All it required was Arthur Dent's signature or thumb print, or just a few scrapings of skin cells from the nape of his neck and it would be on its way again.
It hung around waiting, not quite sure what all this resentment was about.
Meanwhile, Kirp had caught another fish with a head at both ends, but on closer inspection it turned out that it was in fact two fish cut in half and sewn together rather badly, so not only had Kirp failed to rekindle any great interest in two-headed fish but he had seriously cast doubt on the authenticity of the first one.
Only the pikka birds seemed to feel that everything was exactly normal.
The robot drone got Arthur's signature and made its escape.
Arthur bore the parcel back to his hut and sat and looked at it.
He had taken his damaged knives over to the forge bright and early that morning and Strinder had had a look at them and said that he would see what he could do.
They had tried the usual business of waving the knives through the air, feeling for the point of balance and the point of flex and so on, but the joy was gone from it, and Arthur had a sad feeling that his sandwich making days were probably numbered.
He hung his head.
The next appearance of the Perfectly Normal Beasts was imminent, but Arthur felt that the usual festivities of hunting and feasting were going to be rather muted and uncertain.
Something had happened here on Lamuella, and Arthur had a horrible feeling that it was him.
Random protested.
Arthur sighed.
She could see that it really would upset him if she opened it.
She would just have to do it when he wasn't looking.
Chapter 16 Arthur wasn't quite certain which he noticed as being missing first.
When he noticed that the one wasn't there his mind instantly leapt to the other and he knew immediately that they were both gone and that something insanely bad and difficult to deal with would happen as a result.
Random was not there.
And neither was the parcel.
He had left it up on a shelf all day, in plain view.
It was an exercise in trust.
He knew that one of the things he was supposed to do as a parent was to show trust in his child, to build a sense of trust and confidence into the bedrock of relationship between them.
He had had a nasty feeling that that might be an idiotic thing to do, but he did it anyway, and sure enough it had turned out to be an idiotic thing to do.
You live and learn.
At any rate, you live.
You also panic.
Arthur ran out of the hut.
It was the middle of the evening.
The light was getting dim and a storm was brewing.
He could not see her anywhere, nor any sign of her.
He asked.
No one had seen her.
He asked again.
No one else had seen her.
They were going home for the night.
A little wind was whipping round the edge of the village, picking things up and tossing them around in a dangerously casual manner.
He found Old Thrashbarg and asked him.
Thrashbarg looked at him stonily, and then pointed in the one direction that Arthur had dreaded, and had therefore instinctively known was the way she would have gone.
So now he knew the worst.
She had gone where she thought he would not follow her.
He looked up at the sky, which was sullen, streaked and livid, and reflected that it was the sort of sky that the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse wouldn't feel like a bunch of complete idiots riding out of.
With a heavy sense of the utmost foreboding he set off on the track that led to the forest in the next valley.
The first heavy blobs of rain began to hit the ground as Arthur tried to drag himself to some sort of run.
Random reached the crest of the hill and looked down into the next valley.
It had been a longer and harder climb than she had anticipated.
She was a little worried that doing the trip at night was not that great an idea, but her father had been mooching around near the hut all day trying to pretend to either her or himself that he wasn't guarding the parcel.
At last he'd had to go over to the forge to talk with Strinder about the knives, and Random had seized her opportunity and done a runner with the parcel.
It was perfectly clear that she couldn't just open the thing there, in the hut, or even in the village.
He might have come across her at any moment.
Which meant that she had to go where she wouldn't be followed.
She could stop where she was now.
She had gone this way in the hope that he wouldn't follow her.
And even if he did he would never find her up in the wooded parts of the hill with night drawing in and the rain starting.
All the way up, the parcel had been jiggling under her arm.
It was a satisfyingly hunky sort of thing: a box with a square top about the length of her forearm on each side, and about the length of her hand deep, wrapped up in brown plasper with an ingenious new form of self-knotting string.
It didn't rattle as she shook it, but she sensed that its weight was concentrated excitingly at the centre.
Having come so far, though, there was a certain satisfaction in not stopping here, but carrying on down into what seemed to be almost a forbidden area - where her father's ship had come down.
She would keep going and save the parcel up for when she got there.
It was getting darker, though.
She hadn't used her tiny electric torch yet, because she didn't want to be visible from a distance.
She would have to use it now, but it probably didn't matter since she would be on the other side of the hill which divided the valleys from each other.
She turned her torch on.
Almost at the same moment a fork of lightning ripped across the valley into which she was heading and startled her considerably.
As the darkness shuddered back around her and a clap of thunder rolled out across the land she felt suddenly rather small and lost with just a feeble pencil of light bobbing in her hand.
Perhaps she should stop after all and open the parcel here.
Or maybe she should go back and come out again tomorrow.
It was only a momentary hesitation, though.
She knew there was no going back tonight, and sensed that there was no going back ever.
She headed on down the side of the hill.
The rain was beginning to pick up now.
Where a short while ago it had been a few heavy blobs it was settling in for a good pour now, hissing in the trees, and the ground was getting slippery under her feet.
At least, she thought it was the rain hissing in the trees.
Shadows were leaping and leering at her as her light bobbed through the trees.
Onwards and downwards.
She hurried on for another ten or fifteen minutes, soaked to the skin now and shivering, and gradually became aware that there seemed to be some other light somewhere ahead of her.
It was very faint and she wasn't certain if she was imagining it or not.
She turned off her torch to see.
There did seem to be some sort of dim glow ahead.
She couldn't tell what it was.
She turned her torch back on and continued down the hill, towards whatever it was.
There was something wrong with the woods though.
She couldn't immediately say what it was, but they didn't seem like sprightly healthy woods looking forward to a good spring.
The trees were lolling at sickly angles and had a sort of pallid, blighted look about them.
Random more than once had the worrying sensation that they were trying to reach towards her as she passed them, but it was just a trick of the way that her light caused their shadows to flicker and lurch.
Suddenly, something fell out of a tree in front of her.
She leapt backwards with alarm, dropping both the torch and the box as she did so.
She went down into a crouch, pulling the specially sharpened rock out of her pocket.
The thing that had fallen out of the tree was moving.
The torch was lying on the ground and pointing towards it, and a vast, grotesque shadow was slowly lurching through the light towards her.
She could hear faint rustling and screeching noises over the steady hiss of the rain.
She scrabbled on the ground for the torch, found it, and shone it directly at the creature.
At the same moment another dropped from a tree just a few feet away.
She swung the torch wildly from one to another.
She held her rock up, ready to throw.
They were quite small in fact.
It was the angle of the light that had made them loom so large.
Not only small.
But small, furry and cuddly.
And there was another, dropping from the trees.
It fell through the beam of light, so she saw it quite clearly.
It fell neatly and precisely, turned, and then, like the other two, started slowly and purposefully to advance on Random.
She stayed rooted to the spot.
She still had her rock.
Poised and ready to throw, but was increasingly conscious of the fact that the things she had it poised and ready to throw at were squirrels.
Or at least, squirrel-like things.
Soft, warm, cuddly squirrel-like things advancing on her in a way she wasn't at all certain she liked.
She shone her torch directly on the first of them.
It was making aggressive, hectoring, screeching noises, and carrying in one of its little fists a small tattered piece of wet, pink rag.
Random hefted her rock menacingly in her hand, but it made no impression at all on the squirrel advancing on her with its wet piece of rag.
She backed away.
She didn't know at all how to deal with this.
If they had been vicious snarling slavering beasts with glistening fangs she would have pitched into them with a will, but squirrels behaving like this she couldn't quite handle.
She backed away again.
The second squirrel was starting to make a flanking manoeuvre round to her right.
Carrying a cup.
Some kind of acorn thing.
The third was right behind it and making its own advance.
What was it carrying?
Some little scrap of soggy paper.
Random thought.
She stepped back again, caught her ankle against the root of a tree and fell over backwards.
Instantly the first squirrel darted forward and was on top of her, advancing along her stomach with cold purpose.
In its eyes, and a piece of wet rag in its fist.
Random tried to jump up, but only managed to jump about an inch.
The startled movement of the squirrel on her stomach startled her in return.
The squirrel froze, gripping her skin through her soaking shirt with its tiny claws.
Then slowly, inch by inch, it made its way up her, stopped, and proffered her the rag.
She felt almost hypnotised by the strangeness of the thing and its tiny glinting eyes.
It proffered her the rag again.
It pushed it at her repeatedly, screeching insistently, till at last, nervously, hesitantly, she took the thing from it.
It continued to watch her intently, its eyes darting all over her face.
She had no idea what to do.
Rain and mud were streaming down her face and she had a squirrel sitting on her.
She wiped some mud out of her eyes with the rag.
The squirrel shrieked triumphantly, grabbed the rag back, leapt off her, ran scampering into the dark, enclosing night, darted up into a tree, dived into a hole in the trunk, settled back and lit a cigarette.
Meanwhile Random was trying to fend off the squirrel with the acorn cup full of rain and the one with the paper.
She shuffled backwards on her bottom.
They darted back, in fright, and then darted right forward again with their gifts.
She brandished her rock at them.
The squirrels scampered round in consternation.
Then one darted straight at her, dropped the acorn cup in her lap, turned and ran off into the night.
The other stood quivering for a moment, then put its scrap of paper neatly down in front of her and disappeared as well.
She was alone again, but trembling with confusion.
She got unsteadily to her feet, picked up her rock and her parcel, then paused and picked up the scrap of paper as well.
It was so soggy and dilapidated it was hard to make out what it was.
It seemed just to be a fragment of an in-flight magazine.
Just as Random was trying to understand exactly what it was that this all meant, a man walked out into the clearing in which she was standing, raised a vicious-looking gun and shot her.
Arthur was thrashing around hopelessly two or three miles behind her, on the upward side of the hill.
Within minutes of setting out he had gone back again and equipped himself with a lamp.
Not an electric one.
The only electric light in the place was the one that Random had brought with her.
This was a kind of dim hurricane lamp: a perforated metal canister from Strinder's forge, which contained a reservoir of inflammable fish oil, a wick of knotted dried grass and was wrapped in a translucent film made from dried membranes from the gut of a Perfectly Normal Beast.
It had now gone out.
Arthur jiggled around with it in a thoroughly pointless kind of a way for a few seconds.
There was clearly no way he was going to get the thing suddenly to burst into flame again in the middle of a rainstorm, but it's impossible not to make a token effort.
Reluctantly he threw the thing aside.
What to do?
This was hopeless.
He was absolutely sodden, his clothes heavy and billowing with the rain, and now he was lost in the dark as well.
For a brief second he was lost in the blinding light, and then he was lost in the dark again.
The sheet of lightning had at least shown him that he was very close to the brow of the hill.
Once he had breasted that he would... well, he wasn't certain what he would do.
He'd have to work that out when he got there.
He limped forward and upwards.
A few minutes later he knew that he was standing panting at the top.
There was some kind of dim glow in the distance below him.
He had no idea what it was, and indeed he hardly liked to think.
It was the only thing he had to make towards, though, so he started to make his way, stumbling, lost and frightened towards it.
The flash of lethal light passed straight through Random and, about two seconds later, so did the man who had shot it.
Other than that he paid her no attention whatsoever.
He had shot someone standing behind her, and when she turned to look, he was kneeling over the body and going through its pockets.
The tableau froze and vanished.
It was replaced a second later by a giant pair of teeth framed by immense and perfectly glossed red lips.
A huge blue brush appeared out of nowhere and started foamily to scrub at the teeth, which continued to hang there gleaming in the shimmering curtain of rain.
Random blinked at it twice before she got it.
It was a commercial.
The guy who had shot her was part of a holographic in-flight movie.
She must now be very close to where the ship had crashed.
Obviously some of its systems were more indestructible than others.
The next half-mile of the journey was particularly troublesome.
Not only did she have the cold and the rain and the night to contend with, but also the fractured and thrashing remains of the ship's on-board entertainment system.
Spaceships and jetcars and helipods crashed and exploded continuously around her, illuminating the night, villainous people in strange hats smuggled dangerous drugs through her, and the combined orchestra and chorus of the Hallapolis State Opera performed the closing March of the AnjaQantine Star Guard from Act IV of Rizgar's Blamwellamum of Woont in a little glade somewhere off to her left.
And then she was standing on the lip of a very nasty looking and bubbly-edged crater.
There was still a faint warm glow coming from what would otherwise have looked like an enormous piece of caramelised chewing gum in the centre of the pit: the melted remains of a great spaceship.
She stood looking at it for a longish while, and then at last started to walk along and around the edge of the crater.
She was no longer certain what she was looking for, but kept moving anyway, keeping the horror of the pit to her left.
The rain was beginning to ease off a little, but it was still extremely wet, and since she didn't know what it was that was in the box, whether it was perhaps something delicate or damageable, she thought she ought to find somewhere reasonably dry to open it.
She hoped she hadn't already damaged it by dropping it.
She played her torch around the surrounding trees, which were thin on the ground here, and mostly charred and broken.
In the middle distance she thought she could see a jumbled outcrop of rock which might provide some shelter, and she started to pick her way towards it.
All around she found the detritus that had been ejected from the ship as it broke up, before the final fireball.
After she had moved two or three hundred yards from the edge of the crater she came across the tattered fragments of some fluffy pink material, sodden, muddied and drooping amongst the broken trees.
She guessed, correctly, that this must be the remains of the escape cocoon that had saved her father's life.
She went and looked at it more closely, and then noticed something close to it on the ground, half covered in mud.
She picked it up and wiped the mud off it.
It was some kind of electronic device the size of a small book.
Feebly glowing on its cover, in response to her touch, were some large friendly letters.
They said DON'T PANIC.
She knew what this was.
It was her father's copy of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
She felt instantly reassured by it, turned her head up to the thundery sky and let some.
Rain wash over her face and into her mouth.
She shook her head and hurried on towards the rocks.
Clambering up and over them she almost immediately found the perfect thing.
The mouth of a cave.
She played her torch into its interior.
It seemed to be dry and safe.
Picking her way carefully, she walked in.
It was quite spacious, but didn't go that deep.
Exhausted and relieved she sat on a convenient rock, put the box down in front of her and started immediately to open it.
All over the Galaxy the science departments of all the major universities were acquiring more and more elaborate equipment to probe and search the hearts of distant galaxies, and then the very centre and the very edges of the whole Universe, but when eventually it was tracked down it turned out in fact to be all the stuff which the equipment had been packed in.
There was quite a large quantity of missing matter in the box, little soft round white pellets of missing matter, which Random discarded for future generations of physicists to track down and discover all over again once the findings of the current generation of physicists had been lost and forgotten about.
Out of the pellets of missing matter she lifted the featureless black disk.
She put it down on a rock beside her and sifted amongst all the missing matter to see if there was anything else, a manual or some attachments or something, but there was nothing else at all.
Just the black disk.
She shone the torch on it.
As she did so, cracks began to appear along its apparently featureless surface.
Random backed away nervously, but then saw that the thing, whatever it was, was merely unfolding itself.
The process was wonderfully beautiful.
It was extraordinarily elaborate but also simple and elegant.
It was like a piece of self opening origami, or a rosebud blooming into a rose in just a few seconds.
Where just a few moments earlier there had been a smoothly curved black disk there was now a bird.
A bird, hovering there.
Random continued to back away from it, carefully and watchfully.
It was a little like a pikka bird, only rather smaller.
That is to say, in fact it was larger, or to be more exact, precisely the same size or, at least, not less than twice the size.
It was also both a lot bluer and a lot pinker than pikka birds, while at the same time being perfectly black.
There was also something very odd about it, which Random couldn't immediately make out.
It certainly shared with pikka birds the impression it gave that it was watching something that you couldn't see.
Suddenly it vanished.
Then, just as suddenly everything went black.
Random dropped into a tense crouch, feeling for the specially sharpened rock in her pocket again.
Then the blackness receded and rolled itself up into a ball and then the blackness was the bird again.
It hung in the air in front of her, beating its wings slowly and staring at her.
It spoke this time at a much higher pitch.
There was then a pause.
So.
Obviously not.
Good.
I can use those as data channels.
Now.
Suddenly the air was full of nothing but interlocking birds.
Random was well used to spending time in virtual realities, but this was something far weirder than anything she had previously encountered.
It was as if the whole geometry of space was redefined in seamless bird shapes.
Random gasped and flung her arms round her face, her arms moving through bird-shaped space.
It concertinaed into a tunnel of birds, as if it was a bird caught between parallel mirrors, reflecting infinitely into the distance.
Random gestured helplessly off into the distance.
Good.
Interesting.
Moment by moment the bird was going through mind-mangling transformations of shape and extent.
So.
Am I your mother?
Am I a rock?
Do I seem huge, squishy and sinuously intertwined?
No?
How about now?
For once the bird was perfectly still and steady.
Hmmm.
Well I think we've sorted all that out now.
If you'd like to know, I can tell you that in your universe you move freely in three dimensions that you call space.
You move in a straight line in a fourth, which you call time, and stay rooted to one place in a fifth, which is the first fundamental of probability.
After that it gets a hit complicated, and there's all sorts of stuff going on in dimensions 13 to 22 that you really wouldn't want to know about.
All you really need to know for the moment is that the universe is a lot more complicated than you might think, even if you start from a position of thinking it's pretty damn complicated in the first place.
In your universe I am your Guide.
It turned in mid-air and swooped out of the cave, and then perched on a rock, just beneath an overhang, out of the rain, which was getting heavier again.
Random didn't like being bossed around by a bird, but she followed it to the mouth of the cave anyway, still fingering the rock in her pocket.
Sheets of the stuff were sweeping through the night, moonlight sifting through it.
Look, who are you?
What were you doing in that box?
Why have I spent a night running through the forest fending off demented squirrels to find that all I've got at the end of it is a bird asking me what rain is.
It's just water falling through the bloody air, that's what it is.
Random almost shocked herself, she screamed the words so loudly.
I just see a load of rain.
There aren't any shapes.
Just on the very edge of visibility a thin faint beam fanned out of the bird's eyes.
In the dry air beneath the overhang there was nothing to see.
Where the beam hit the drops of rain as they fell through it, there was a flat sheet of light, so bright and vivid it seemed solid.
I'm just using light to draw your attention to certain drops at certain moments.
The light shut off.
Hanging in the rain was a giant and very vivid three-dimensional image of her father looking startled about something.
About two miles away behind Random, her father, struggling his way through the woods suddenly stopped.
He was startled to see an image of himself looking startled about something hanging brightly in the rain-filled air about two miles away.
About two miles away some distance to the right of the direction in which he was heading.
He was almost completely lost, convinced he was going to die of cold and wet and exhaustion and beginning to wish he could just get on with it.
He had just been brought an entire golfing magazine by a squirrel, as well, and his brain, was beginning to howl and gibber.
Seeing a huge bright image of himself light up in the sky told him that, on balance, he was probably right to howl and gibber but probably wrong as far as the direction he was heading was concerned.
Taking a deep breath, he turned and headed off towards the inexplicable light show.
It was the fact that the image was her father that had startled her rather than the appearance of the image itself.
She had seen her first hologram when she was two months old and had been put in it to play.
She had seen her most recent one about half an hour ago playing the March of the AnjaQantine Star Guard.
It makes an apparently solid image in your mind.
But it's all just images in the Mish Mash.
The image was of a woman emerging from a spacecraft inside a large, grey hangar-like building.
She was being escorted by a group of tall, thin purplish-green creatures.
It was definitely Random's mother.
Well, almost definitely.
Trillian wouldn't have been walking quite so uncertainly in low gravity, or looking around her at a boring old life- support environment with quite such a disbelieving look on her face, or carrying such a quaint old camera.
Though I think...
No.
Something very strange and wonderful now swam into view in the rain.
It was a huge, bluish-greenish globe, misty and cloud-covered, turning with, majestic slowness against a black, starry background.
A little less than two miles away, now, Arthur Dent stood still in his tracks.
He could not believe what he could see, hanging there, shrouded in rain, but brilliant and vividly real against the night sky - the Earth.
He gasped at the sight of it.
Then, at the moment he gasped, it disappeared again.
Then it appeared again.
Then, and this was the bit that made him give up and stick straws in his hair, it turned into a sausage.
* * * Random was also startled by the sight of this huge, blue and green and watery and misty sausage hanging above her.
And now it was a string of sausages, or rather it was a string of sausages in which many of the sausages were missing.
The whole brilliant string turned and span in a bewildering dance in the air and then gradually slowed, grew insubstantial and faded into the glistening darkness of the night.
It lies on what you might call a fault line in the landscape of probability which means that at many probability co-ordinates, the whole of it simply ceases to exist.
It has an inherent instability, which is typical of anything that lies within what are usually designated the Plural sectors.
The bird Guide did not answer at once.
It spread its wings and, with an easy grace, ascended into the air and flew out into the rain which, once again, was beginning to lighten.
It soared ecstatically up into the night sky, lights flashed around it, dimensions dithered in its wake.
It swooped and turned and looped and turned again and came at last to rest two feet in front of Random's face, its wings beating slowly and silently.
It spoke to her again.
Vast in time, vast in space.
That's because of the filters through which you perceive it.
But I was built with no filters at all, which means I perceive the mish mash which contains all possible universes but which has, itself, no size at all.
For me, anything is possible.
I am omniscient and omnipotent, extremely vain, and, what is more, I come in a handy self-carrying package.
A slow smile spread over Random's face.
Random laughed.
Where it hasn't been blown up.
OK.
So you're the Guide.
To me the flow of time is irrelevant.
You decide what you want.
Random frowned.
You want a lift a ship arrives and gives you one.
The pilot may think he has any one of a million reasons why he has decided to stop and pick you up.
The bird was silent.
It was so silent that Random had not noticed the descending spaceship until it was nearly on top of her.
Arthur had noticed it.
He was a mile away now and closing.
Just after the illuminated sausage display had drawn to its conclusion he had noticed the faint glimmerings of further lights coming down out of the clouds and had, to begin with, assumed it to be another piece of flashy son et lumiere.
It took a moment or so for it to dawn on him that it was an actual spaceship, and a moment or two longer for him to realise that it was dropping directly down to where he assumed his daughter to be.
That was when, rain or no rain, leg injury or no leg injury, darkness or no darkness, he suddenly started really to run.
He fell almost immediately, slid and hurt his knee quite badly on a rock.
He slithered back up to his feet and tried again.
He had a horrible cold feeling that he was about to lose Random for ever.
Limping and cursing, he ran.
He didn't know what it was that had been in the box, but the name on it had been Ford Prefect, and that was the name he cursed as he ran.
The ship was one of the sexiest and most beautiful ones that Random had ever seen.
It was astounding.
Silver, sleek, ineffable.
If she didn't know better she would have said it was an RW6.
As it settled silently beside her she realised that it actually was an RW6 and she could scarcely breathe for excitement.
An RW6 was the sort of thing you only saw in the sort of magazines that were designed to provoke civil unrest.
She was also extremely nervous.
The manner and timing of its arrival was deeply unsettling.
Either it was the most bizarre coincidence or something very peculiar and worrying was going on.
She waited a little tensely for the ship's hatch to open.
Her Guide - she thought of it as hers now - was hovering lightly over her right shoulder, its wings barely fluttering.
The hatch opened.
Just a little dim light escaped.
A moment or two passed and a figure emerged.
He stood still for a moment or so, obviously trying to accustom his eyes to the darkness.
Then he caught sight of Random standing there, and seemed a little surprised.
He started to walk towards her.
Then suddenly he shouted in surprise and started to run at her.
Random was not a good person to take a run at on a dark night when she was feeling a little strung out.
She had unconsciously been fingering the rock in her pocket from the moment she saw the craft coming down.
Still running, slithering, hurtling, bumping into trees, Arthur saw at last that he was too late.
The ship had only been on the ground for about three minutes, and now, silently, gracefully it was rising up above the trees again, turning smoothly in the fine speckle of rain to which the storm had now abated, climbing, climbing, tipping up its nose and, suddenly, effortlessly, hurtling up through the clouds.
Gone.
Random was in it.
It was impossible for Arthur to know this, but he just went ahead and knew it anyway.
She was gone.
He had had his stint at being a parent and could scarcely believe how badly he had done at it.
He tried to continue running, but his feet were dragging, his knee was hurting like fury and he knew that he was too late.
He could not conceive that he could feel more wretched and awful than this, but he was wrong.
He limped his way at last to the cave where Random had sheltered and opened the box.
The ground bore the indentations of the spacecraft that had landed there only minutes before, but of Random there was no sign.
He wandered disconsolately into the cave, found the empty box and piles of missing matter pellets strewn around the place.
He felt a little cross about that.
He'd tried to teach her about cleaning up after herself.
Feeling a bit cross with her about something like that helped him feel less desolate about her leaving.
He knew he had no means of finding her.
His foot knocked against something unexpected.
He bent down to pick it up, and was thoroughly surprised to discover what it was.
It was his old Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
How did that come to be in the cave?
He had never returned to collect it from the scene of the crash.
He had not wanted to revisit the crash and he had not wanted the Guide again.
He had reckoned he was here on Lamuella, making sandwiches for good.
How did it come to be in the cave?
It was active.
The words on the cover flashed DON'T PANIC at him.
He went out of the cave again into the dim and damp moonlight.
He sat on a rock to have a look through the old Guide, and then discovered it wasn't a rock, it was a person.
Chapter 18 Arthur leapt to his feet with a start of fear.
It would be hard to say which he was more frightened of: that he might have hurt the person he had inadvertently sat on or that the person he had inadvertently sat on would hurt him back.
There seemed, on inspection, to be little immediate cause for alarm on the second count.
Whoever it was he had sat on was unconscious.
That would probably go a great deal of the way towards explaining what he was doing lying there.
He seemed to be breathing OK, though.
Arthur felt his pulse.
That was OK as well.
He was lying on his side, half curled up.
It was so long ago and far away when Arthur had last done First Aid that he really couldn't remember what it was he was supposed to do.
The first thing he was supposed to do, he remembered, was to have a First Aid kit about his person.
Damn.
Should he roll him on to his back or not?
Suppose he had any broken bones?
Suppose he swallowed his tongue?
Suppose he sued him?
Who, apart from anything else, was he?
At that moment the unconscious man groaned loudly and rolled himself over.
Arthur wondered if he should.
He looked at him.
He looked at him again.
He looked at him again, just to make absolutely sure.
Despite the fact that he had been thinking he was feeling about as low as he possibly could, he experienced a terrible sinking feeling.
The figure groaned again and slowly opened his eyes.
It took him a while to focus, then he blinked and stiffened.
Ford groaned again.
* * * Five minutes later he was sitting up and rubbing the side of his head, where he had quite a large swelling.
Ford frowned.
Ford thought.
Fie said it a little tightly.
Can happen.
Ship's cabin robots get destroyed.
The cyberminds that control them survive and start infesting the local wildlife.
Can turn a whole ecosystem into some kind of helpless thrashing service industry, handing out hot towels and drinks to passers-by.
Should be a law against it.
Probably is.
Probably also a law against there being a law against it so everybody can get nice and worked up.
Fley ho.
Ford stopped rubbing his head.
I'm in touch with her from time to time.
Arthur said nothing.
Ford started to feel the side of his head again in some bemusement.
Long story.
I thought I could rely on you to be absolutely boring and not open it.
Anyway, coming in at night I couldn't find this village place.
I was going by pretty basic information.
I couldn't find any signal of any kind.
I found I'd landed in some kind of wood.
Couldn't figure out what was going on.
I get out, and then see this woman standing there.
The new Guide!
The bird thing!
You were meant to keep it safe, you idiot, but this woman had the thing right there by her shoulder.
I was very badly hurt.
She and the bird started to make off towards my ship.
I've got this great relationship going now between my credit card and the Guide's central computer.
It's - oh never mind.
Look, just get some kind of grip will you, Arthur?
Or at least get some kind of catalogue.
At this point I was very worried.
And, I think, semi-concussed.
I was down on my knees and bleeding profusely, so I did the only thing I could think of, which was to beg.
I said, please for Zark's sake don't take my ship.
And don't leave me stranded in the middle of some primitive zarking forest with no medical help and a head injury.
Ford held his head and tried to see straight.
The sky was beginning to lighten in the west, which was where the sun rose.
Arthur didn't particularly want to see it.
The last thing he wanted after a hellish night like this one was some blasted day coming along and barging about the place.
It was a bit embarrassing really.
When I first arrived, that is, when they rescued me from the wreckage of this super high-technology spacecraft which had crashed on their planet, they were very nice to me and I thought I should help them out a bit.
You know, I'm an educated chap from a high-technology culture, I could show them a thing or two.
And of course I couldn't.
I haven't got the faintest idea, when it comes down to it, of how anything actually works.
I don't mean like video-recorders, nobody knows how to work those.
I mean just something like a pen or an artesian well or something.
Not the foggiest.
I couldn't help at all.
One day I got glum and made myself a sandwich.
That suddenly got them all excited.
They'd never seen one before.
Not as such.
Ford had no idea what he was talking about and couldn't be bothered to ask.
Arthur sighed a little forlornly.
You live here!
What do you usually do?
As if deliberately to prove him wrong, there was a long, low distant roll of thunder.
Ford leapt to his feet fretfully and started pacing backwards and forwards in the feeble, painful light of the early dawn which lay streaked against the sky as if someone had dragged a piece of liver across it.
You mean my daughter out there all alone in the Galaxy?
The Guide has been taken over.
Arthur leapt up.
Oh!
Oh!
I'm incoherent with excitement!
I can hardly wait for it to come out to find out which are the most exciting spaceports to get bored hanging about in some globular cluster I've never heard of.
Ford narrowed his eyes.
I really think it might just be a crazy little thing called sarcasm seeping in at the edges of my manner of speech!
Ford, I have had a fucking bad night!
Can't we just sit and go budum- budumbudum with our lips for a bit?
Couldn't we just dribble gently and loll a little bit to the left for a few minutes?
I can't stand it.
Ford!
I can't stand all this thinking and trying to work things out any more.
What is the point?
We assume that every time we do anything we know what the consequences will be, i.e., more or less what we intend them to be.
This is not only not always correct.
Arthur put his head in his hands and shook it gently from side to side.
Thunder rolled in the pause.
This cheered Arthur up.
So having saved yourself very cleverly once you very sensibly went and jumped again.
Please don't tell me why.
And this is the nub.
You could trace the chain and branches of crucial events and coincidences back and back.
Turned out the new Guide had done it.
It's a lethal little thing.
They munched for a bit.
It then said that it would put its services at my disposal in my universe.
I said, thanks but no thanks.
It said that it would anyway, whether I liked it or not.
I said just try it, and it said it would and, indeed, already had done.
I said we'd see about that and it said that we would.
That's when I decided to pack the thing up and get it out of there.
Then, what with one thing and another, I thought it prudent to jump out of the window again, being fresh out of other options at the time.
Luckily for me the jetcar was there otherwise I would have had to fall back on ingenious quick-thinking, agility, maybe another shoe or, failing all else, the ground.
Everything went swimmingly smoothly for me from then on, up to the very moment that I come up against the totty with the rock, then, bang, I'm history.
She's the next one in the chain who will think that everything is going fabulously for her.
She can beat whoever she likes around the head with bits of the landscape, everything will just swim for her until she's done whatever she's supposed to do and then it will be all up for her too.
Oh, wake up, Arthur.
Look, let me try it again.
The new Guide came out of the research labs.
It made use of this new technology of Unfiltered Perception.
Got that?
I don't perceive everything.
You don't perceive everything.
We have filters.
The new Guide doesn't have any sense filters.
It perceives everything.
It wasn't a complicated technological idea.
It was just a question of leaving a bit out.
Now because the bird can perceive every possible Universe it is present in every possible universe.
It is fantastically stupid.
Look.
The machine's only a little Guide.
It's got some quite clever cybertechnology in it, but because it has Unfiltered Perception, any smallest move it makes has the power of a virus.
It can propagate throughout space, time and a million other dimensions.
Anything can be focused anywhere in any of the universes that you and I move in.
Its power is recursive.
Think of a computer program.
Somewhere, there is one key instruction, and everything else is just functions calling themselves, or brackets billowing out endlessly through an infinite address space.
What happens when the brackets collapse?
Is any of this making sense?
He sat down again.
You know who I think I saw at the Guide offices?
Vogons.
Ah.
Arthur leapt to his feet.
It's the spring migration of the Perfectly Normal Beasts.
Arthur told him.
It wasn't often that Arthur had the pleasure of seeing Ford's eyes open wide with astonishment.
Chapter 19 It was a sight that Arthur never quite got used to, or tired of.
He and Ford had tracked their way swiftly along the side of the small river that flowed down along the bed of the valley, and when at last they reached the margin of the plains they pulled themselves up into the branches of a large tree to get a better view of one of the stranger and more wonderful visions that the Galaxy has to offer.
The great thunderous herd of thousand upon thousand of Perfectly Normal Beasts was sweeping in magnificent array across the Anhondo Plain.
In the early pale light of the morning, as the great animals charged through the fine steam of the sweat of their bodies mingled with the muddy mist churned up by their pounding hooves, their appearance seemed a little unreal and ghostly anyway, but what was heart-stopping about them was where they came from and where they went to, which appeared to be, simply, nowhere.
They formed a solid, charging phalanx roughly a hundred yards wide and half a mile long.
The phalanx never moved, except that it exhibited a slight gradual drift sideways and backwards for the eight or nine days that it regularly appeared for.
But though the phalanx stayed more or less constant, the great beasts of which it was composed charged steadily at upwards of twenty miles an hour, appearing suddenly from thin air at one end of the plain, and disappearing equally abruptly at the other end.
No one knew where they came from, no one knew where they went.
They were so important to the lives of the Lamuellans, it was almost as if nobody liked to ask.
Old Thrashbarg had said on one occasion that some times if you received an answer, the question might be taken away.
Some of the villagers had privately said that this was the only properly wise thing they'd ever heard Thrashbarg say, and after a short debate on the matter, had put it down to chance.
The noise of the pounding of the hooves was so intense that it was hard to hear anything else above it.
There are quite a lot of worlds where you can see how the landmasses have cracked up and moved around just from the weirdly long or meandering routes that migrating animals take.
This might be something like that.
We live in twisted times.
Arthur looked at him in a kind of frozen way.
At least I won't.
Ford frowned.
Fie pulled out his own battered old copy of the FHitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy and accessed it.
I've only ever heard it said, and that was by someone who had a mouthful of other people's teeth.
Ford thought for a moment.
One of the places he claimed I'd got him killed was Stavromula Beta.
Someone tries to shoot me, it seems.
I duck and Agrajag, or at least, one of his many reincarnations, gets hit.
It seems that this has definitely happened at some point in time so, I suppose, I can't get killed at least until after I've ducked on Stavromula Beta.
Ford tried a few other searches of the FHitchhiker's Guide, but drew a blank.
He wondered why it was ringing a very, very faint bell, though.
If you spear one in the herd it just gets trampled, so they have to lure them out one at a time for the kill.
It's very like the way a matador works, you know, with a brightly coloured cape.
You get one to charge at you and then step aside and execute a rather elegant swing through with the cape.
Chapter 20 Leaping on to the back of a one-and-a-half-ton Perfectly Normal Beast migrating through your world at a thundering thirty miles an hour is not as easy as it might at first seem.
Certainly it is not as easy as the Lamuellan hunters made it seem, and Arthur Dent was prepared to discover that this might turn out to be the difficult bit.
What he hadn't been prepared to discover, however, was how difficult it was even getting to the difficult bit.
It was the bit that was supposed to be the easy bit which turned out to be practically impossible.
They couldn't even catch the attention of a single animal.
The Perfectly Normal Beasts were so intent on working up a good thunder with their hooves, heads down shoulders forward, back legs pounding the ground into porridge that it would have taken something not merely startling but actually geological to disturb them.
The sheer amount of thundering and pending was, in the end, more than Arthur and Ford could deal with.
After they had spent nearly two hours prancing about doing increasingly foolish things with a medium-sized floral patterned bath towel, they had not managed to get even one of the great beasts thundering and pounding past them to do so much as glance casually in their direction.
They were within three feet of the horizontal avalanche of sweating bodies.
To have been much nearer would have been to risk instant death, chronologic or no chronologic.
Arthur had seen what remained of any Perfectly Normal Beast which, as the result of a clumsy misthrow by a young and inexperienced Lamuellan hunter, got speared while still thundering and pounding with the herd.
One stumble was all it took.
No prior appointment with death on Stavromula Beta, wherever the hell Stavromula Beta was, would save you or anybody else from the thunderous, mangling pounding of those hooves.
At last, Arthur and Ford staggered back.
They sat down, exhausted and defeated, and started to criticise each other's technique with the towel.
The voice had come from behind them.
They turned, and there, standing behind them in the early morning sun, was Old Thrashbarg.
From under the rough, cassocky robe-like thing he wore he drew a small pikka bird.
It sat restlessly on Old Thrashbarg's hand and peered intently at Bob knows what darting around about three feet six inches in front of it.
Ford instantly went into the sort of alert crouch he liked to do when he wasn't quite sure what was going on or what he ought to do about it.
He waved his arms around very slowly in what he hoped was an ominous manner.
He's just as experienced a bluffer as you are.
It lays eggs and goes ark at things you can't see.
Make rather a good omelette.
Fie slowly stood up from his crouched position and started to brush himself down.
Fie was still watching the bird, though.
Ford almost went back into his crouch.
Um, yes.
I'm afraid I think I'm going to have to be popping off now.
But young Drimple, my apprentice, will be a fine sandwich maker in my stead.
Old Thrashbarg regarded him gravely.
FHis old grey eyes moved sadly.
Fie held his arms aloft, one still carrying a bobbing pikka bird, the other his staff.
Fie paused, furrowed his brow, and sighed as he closed his eyes in pious contemplation.
Arthur was stunned.
Something was already happening.
The presence of the pikka bird at the end of Thrashbarg's outstretched arm was sending tremors of interest through the thundering herd.
The odd head flicked momentarily in their direction.
Arthur began to remember some of the Perfectly Normal Beast hunts he had witnessed.
Fie recalled that as well as the hunter-matadors brandishing their capes there were always others standing behind them holding pikka birds.
Fie had always assumed that, like him, they had just come along to watch.
Old Thrashbarg moved forward, a little closer to the rolling herd.
Some of the Beasts were now tossing their heads back with interest at the sight of the pikka bird.
Old Thrashbarg's outstretched arms were trembling.
Only the pikka bird itself seemed to show no interest in what was going on.
A few anonymous molecules of air nowhere in particular engaged all of its perky attention.
Arthur advanced with Ford's towel, moving the way the hunter- matadors did, with a kind of elegant strut that did not come at all naturally to him.
But now he knew what to do and that it was right.
He brandished and flicked the towel a few times, to be ready for the moment, and then he watched.
Some distance away he spotted the Beast he wanted.
Head down, it was galloping towards him, right on the very edge of the herd.
Old Thrashbarg switched the bird, the Beast looked up, tossed its head, and then, just as its head was coming down again, Arthur flourished the towel in the Beast's line of sight.
It tossed its head again in bemusement, and its eyes followed the movement of the towel.
He had got the Beast's attention.
From that moment on, it seemed the most natural thing to coax and draw the animal towards him.
Its head was up, cocked slightly to one side.
It was slowing to a canter and then a trot.
A few seconds later the huge thing was standing there amongst them, snorting, panting, sweating, and sniffing excitedly at the pikka bird, which appeared not to have noticed its arrival at all.
With strange sort of sweeping movements of his arms Old Thrashbarg kept the pikka bird in front of the Beast, but always out of its reach and always downwards.
With strange sort of sweeping movements of the towel, Arthur kept drawing the Beast's attention this way and that - always downwards.
At last, the Beast dropped, bemused but docile, to its knees.
Ford leapt up on to the great creature's back, scrabbling amongst its thick knotty fur for purchase, grasping great handfuls of the stuff to hold him steady once he was in position.
He performed some elaborate sign and ritual handshake which Arthur couldn't quite get the hang of because Old Thrashbarg had obviously made it up on the spur of the moment, then he pushed Arthur forward.
Taking a deep breath, he clambered up behind Ford on to the great, hot, heaving back of the beast and held on tight.
Huge muscles the size of sea lions rippled and flexed beneath him.
Old Thrashbarg held the bird suddenly aloft.
The Beast's head swivelled up to follow it.
Thrashbarg pushed upwards and upwards repeatedly with his arms and with the pikka bird; and slowly, heavily the Perfectly Normal Beast lurched up off its knees and stood, at last, swaying slightly.
Its two riders held on fiercely and nervously.
Arthur gazed out over the sea of hurtling animals, straining in an attempt to see where it was they were going, but there was nothing but heat haze.
Ford twisted round to glance back, trying to see if there was any clue as to where they had come from.
Still, nothing.
Arthur shouted down at Thrashbarg.
The Perfectly Normal Beast was swaying and rocking restlessly under him.
The thrumming of a thousand hooves was very hard to hear over, and the old man was concentrating on what he was doing.
Still holding the bird aloft, he led the Beast slowly round till it was once more parallel with the motion of its great herd.
He moved forward.
The Beast followed.
He moved forward again.
The Beast followed again.
At last, the Beast was lumbering forward with a little momentum.
He drew back his arm and then hurled it forward with all his strength, casting the pikka bird up into the air above the herd.
This seemed to catch the pikka bird completely by surprise as it had obviously not been paying any attention at all to what was going on.
It took it a moment or two to work out what was happening, then it unfurled its little wings, spread them out, and flew.
Arthur wasn't so sure about wanting to meet his destiny as such.
He just wanted to get to wherever it was they were going so he could get back off this creature again.
He didn't feel at all safe up there.
The Beast was gathering speed as it followed in the wake of the pikka bird.
And then it was in at the fringes of the great tide of animals, and in a moment or two, with its head down, the pikka bird forgotten, it was running with the herd again and rapidly approaching the point at which the herd was vanishing into thin air.
Arthur and Ford held on to the great monster for dear life, surrounded on all sides by hurtling mountains of bodies.
His distant voice reverberated faintly in their ears.
The point of exit was almost upon them.
Just ahead of them.
Perfectly Normal Beasts were galloping into nothingness and vanishing.
Then with a sudden rush, the stars came on, turned and twisted around their heads, and then, just as suddenly, turned off again.
Chapter 21 Misty grey buildings loomed and flickered.
They bounced up and down in a highly embarrassing way.
What sort of buildings were they?
What were they for?
What did they remind her of?
It's so difficult to know what things are supposed to be when you suddenly turn up unexpectedly on a different world which has a different culture, a different set of the most basic assumptions about life, and also incredibly dull and meaningless architecture.
The sky above the buildings was a cold and hostile black.
The stars, which should have been blindingly brilliant points of light this far from the sun were blurred and dulled by the thickness of the huge shielding bubble.
Perspex or something like it.
Something dull and heavy anyway.
Tricia wound the tape back again to the beginning.
She knew there was something slightly odd about it.
Well, in fact, there were about a million things that were slightly odd about it, but there was one that was nagging at her and she hadn't quite got it.
She sighed and yawned.
As she waited for the tape to rewind she cleared away some of the dirty polystyrene coffee cups that had accumulated on the editing desk and tipped them into the bin.
She was sitting in a small editing suite at a video production company in Soho.
This was originally to protect her astonishing scoop, but now it was to protect her from embarrassment.
She would watch the tape all the way through again from the beginning.
If she could bear to.
She might do some fast forwarding here and there.
It was about four o'clock on Monday afternoon, and she had a kind of sick feeling.
She was trying to work out what the cause of this slightly sick feeling was, and there was no shortage of candidates.
First of all, it had all come on top of the overnight flight from New York.
The red eye.
Always a killer, that.
Then, being accosted by aliens on her lawn and flown to the planet Rupert.
She was not sufficiently experienced in that sort of thing to be able to say for sure that that was always a killer, but she would be prepared to bet that those who went through it regularly cursed it.
There were always stress charts being published in magazines.
Fifty stress points for losing your job.
Seventy-five points for a divorce or changing your hairstyle and so on.
None of them ever mentioned being accosted on your lawn by aliens and then being flown to the planet Rupert, but she was sure it was worth a few dozen points.
It wasn't that the journey had been particularly stressful.
It had been extremely dull in fact.
Certainly it had been no more stressful than the trip she had just taken across the Atlantic and it had taken roughly the same time, about seven hours.
Well that was pretty astounding wasn't it?
Flying to the outer limits of the solar system in the same time that it took to fly to New York meant they must have some fantastic unheard-of form of propulsion in the ship.
She quizzed her hosts about it and they agreed that it was pretty good.
She was still quite excited at the beginning of the trip.
She found that part of the tape and played it through to herself.
The Grebulons, which is what they called themselves, were politely showing her which buttons they pressed to make the ship go.
It is a long flight.
We watch television.
All of this riveting stuff was on the tape, and fine viewing it made.
First of all the picture quality was extremely poor.
Tricia didn't know why this was, exactly.
She had a feeling that the Grebulons responded to a slightly different range of light frequencies, and that there had been a lot of ultra-violet around which was mucking up the video camera.
There were a lot of interference patterns and video snow as well.
Probably something to do with the warp drive that none of them knew the first thing about.
So what she had on tape, essentially, was a bunch of slightly thin and discoloured people sitting around watching televisions that were showing network broadcasts.
She had also pointed the camera out of the very tiny viewport near her seat and got a nice, slightly streaky effect of stars.
She knew it was real, but it would have taken a good three or four minutes to fake.
In the end she had decided to save her precious videotape for Rupert itself and had simply sat back and watched television with them.
She had even dozed off for a while.
So part of her sick feeling came from the sense that she had had all that time in an alien spacecraft of astounding technological design, and had spent most of it dozing in front of reruns of M*A*S*H and Cagney and Lacey.
But what else was there to do?
She had taken some photos as well, of course, all of which had subsequently turned out to be badly fogged when she got them back from the chemist.
Another part of her sick feeling probably came from the landing on Rupert.
This at least had been dramatic and hair-raising.
The ship had come sweeping in over a dark and sombre landscape, a terrain so desperately far removed from the heat and light of its parent sun that it seemed like a map of the psychological scars on the mind of an abandoned child.
Lights blazed through the frozen darkness and Guided the ship into the mouth of some kind of cave that seemed to bend itself open to accept the small craft.
Unfortunately, because of the angle of their approach, and the depth at which the small thick viewport was set into the craft's skin, it hadn't been possible to get the video camera to point directly at any of it.
She ran through that bit of the tape.
The camera was pointing directly at the sun.
This is normally very bad for a video camera.
But when the sun is roughly a third of a billion miles away it doesn't do any harm.
In fact it hardly makes any impression at all.
You just get a small point of light right in the middle of the frame, which could be just about anything.
It was just one star in a multitude.
Tricia fast-forwarded.
Ah.
Now, the next bit had been quite promising.
They had emerged out of the ship into a vast, grey, hangar-like structure.
This was clearly alien technology on a dramatic scale.
Huge grey buildings under the dark canopy of the Perspex bubble.
These were the same buildings that she had been looking at the end of the tape.
She had taken more footage of them while leaving Rupert a few hours later, just as she was about to reboard the spacecraft for the journey home.
What did they remind her of?
Well, as much as anything else they reminded her of a film set from just about any low-budget science-fiction movie of the last twenty years.
A lot larger, of course, but it all looked thoroughly tawdry and unconvincing on the video screen.
Apart from the dreadful picture quality she had been struggling with the unexpected effects of gravity that was appreciably lower than that on Earth, and she had found it very hard to keep the camera from bouncing around in an embarrassingly unprofessional way.
It was therefore impossible to make out any detail.
And now here was the Leader coming forward to greet her, smiling and sticking his hand out.
That was all he was called.
The Leader.
None of the Grebulons had names, largely because they couldn't think of any.
Tricia discovered that some of them had thought of calling themselves after characters from television programmes they had picked up from Earth, but hard as they had tried to call each other Wayne and Bobby and Chuck, some remnant of something lurking deep in the cultural subconscious they had brought with them from the distant stars which were their homes must have told them that this really wasn't right and wouldn't do.
The Leader had looked pretty much like all the others.
Possibly a bit less thin.
He said how much he enjoyed her shows on TV, that he was her greatest fan, how glad he was that she had been able to come along and visit them on Rupert and how much everybody had been looking forward to her coming, how he hoped the flight had been comfortable and so on.
There was no particular sense she could detect of being any kind of emissary from the stars or anything.
Certainly, watching it now on videotape, he just looked like some guy in costume and make-up, standing in front of a set that wouldn't hold up too well if you leant against it.
She sat staring at the screen with her face cradled in her hands, and shaking her head in slow bewilderment.
This was awful.
Not only was this bit awful but she knew what was coming next.
It was the bit where the Leader asked if she was hungry after the flight, and would she perhaps like to come and have something to eat?
They could discuss things over a little dinner.
She could remember what she was thinking at this point.
Alien food.
How was she going to deal with it?
Would she actually have to eat it?
Would she have access to some sort of paper napkin she could spit stuff out into?
Wouldn't there be all sorts of differential immunity problems?
It turned out to be hamburgers.
Not only did it turn out to be hamburgers, but the hamburgers it turned out to be were very clearly and obviously McDonald's hamburgers which had been reheated in a microwave.
It wasn't just the look of them.
It wasn't just the smell.
This was in his private apartment.
Tricia had looked around it in bewilderment that had bordered on fear but had nevertheless got it all on videotape.
The apartment had a waterbed in it.
And a Midi hi-fi.
And one of those tall electrically illuminated glass things which sit on table tops and appear to have large globules of sperm floating about in them.
The walls were covered in velvet.
The leader lounged against a brown corduroy bean bag and squirted breath-freshener into his mouth.
Tricia began to feel very scared, suddenly.
She was further from Earth than any human being, to her knowledge, had ever been, and she was with an alien creature, who was lounging against a brown corduroy bean bag and squirting breath-freshener into his mouth.
She didn't want to make any false moves.
She didn't want to alarm him.
But there were things she had to know.
It is very sophisticated.
We are a sophisticated people, we Grebulons.
Tricia had nodded tremendously slowly at this point.
The Leader chuckled.
It was one of those dark chocolate reassuring silky chuckles.
No!
Ha Ha!
We have arranged a special box number in New Hampshire.
We make regular pick-up visits.
He lounged back in a relaxed fashion on his bean bag, reached for a reheated french fry and nibbled the end of it, an amused smile playing across, his lips.
Tricia could feel her brain beginning to bubble very slightly.
She kept the video camera going.
The Leader chuckled again.
Tricia nodded slowly again.
She knew that they gave cards exclusively to just about anybody.
Again, Tricia realised with a cold, trickling feeling going down her spine, that explained an awful lot.
She hit the fast forward button again.
There was nothing of any use here at all.
It was all nightmarish madness.
She could have faked something that would have looked more convincing.
Another sick feeling began to creep over her as she watched this hopeless awful tape, and she began, with slow horror, to realise that it must be the answer.
She must be...
She shook her head and tried to get a grip.
An overnight flight going East...
The sleeping pills she had taken to get her through it.
The vodka she'd had to set the sleeping pills going.
What else?
Well.
There was seventeen years of obsession that a glamorous man with two heads, one of which was disguised as a parrot in a cage, had tried to pick her up at a party but had then impatiently flown off to another planet in a flying saucer.
There suddenly seemed to be all sorts of bothersome aspects to that idea that had never really occurred to her.
Never occurred to her.
In seventeen years.
She stuffed her fist into her mouth.
She must get help.
Then there had been Eric Bartlett banging on about alien spacecraft landing on her lawn.
And before that...
New York had been, well, very hot and stressful.
The high hopes and the bitter disappointment.
The astrology stuff.
She must have had a nervous breakdown.
That was it.
She was exhausted and she had had a nervous breakdown and had started hallucinating some time after she got home.
She had dreamt the whole story.
An alien race of people dispossessed of their own lives and histories, stuck on a remote outpost of our solar system and filling their cultural vacuum with our cultural junk.
Ha!
It was nature's way of telling her to check into an expensive medical establishment very quickly.
She was very, very sick.
She looked at how many large coffees she'd got through as well, and realised how heavily she was breathing and how fast.
Part of solving any problem, she told herself, was realising that you had it.
She started to bring her breathing under control.
She had caught herself in time.
She had seen where she was.
She was on the way back from whatever psychological precipice she had been on the brink of.
She started to calm down, to calm down, to calm down.
She sat back in the chair and closed her eyes.
After a while, now that she was breathing normally again, she opened them again.
So where had she got this tape from then?
* * * It was still running.
All right.
It was a fake.
She had faked it herself, that was it.
It must have been her who had faked it because her voice was all over the soundtrack, asking questions.
Every now and then the camera would swing down at the end of a shot and she would see her own feet in her own shoes.
She had faked it and she had no recollection of faking it or any idea of why she had done it.
Her breathing was getting hectic again as she watched the snowy, flickering screen.
She must still be hallucinating.
She shook her head, trying to make it go away.
She had no memory of faking any of this very obviously fake stuff.
On the other hand she did seem to have memories that were very like the faked stuff.
She continued to watch in a bewildered trance.
The person she imagined to be called the Leader was questioning her about astrology and she was answering smoothly and calmly.
Only she could detect the well-disguised rising panic in her own voice.
The Leader pushed a button, and a maroon velvet wall slid aside, revealing a large bank of flat TV monitors.
Each of the monitors was showing a kaleidoscope of different images: a few seconds from a game show, a few seconds from a cop show, a few seconds from a supermarket warehouse security system, a few seconds from somebody's holiday movies, a few seconds of sex, a few seconds of news, a few seconds of comedy.
It was clear that the Leader was very proud of all this stuff and he was waving his hands like a conductor while continuing at the same time to talk complete gibberish.
Another wave of his hands, and all the screens cleared to form one giant computer screen showing in diagrammatic form all the planets of the solar system and mapped out against a background of the stars in their constellations.
The display was completely static.
Great skills.
Great, great skills.
Only we have lost them.
It is too bad.
We like to have skills only they have gone.
They are in space somewhere, hurtling.
With our names and the details of our homes and loved ones.
Obviously what happened next was that Tricia quickly set the video camera up on its tripod to capture the whole scene.
She then walked into shot herself and sat down calmly in front of the giant computer display, spent a few moments familiarising herself with the interface and then started smoothly and competently to pretend that she had the faintest idea what she was doing.
It hadn't been that difficult, in fact.
She was, after all, a mathematician and astrophysicist by training and a television presenter by experience, and what science she had forgotten over the years she was more than capable of making up by bluffing.
The computer she was working on was clear evidence that the Grebulons came from a far more advanced and sophisticated culture than their current vacuous state suggested, and with its aid she was able, within about half an hour, to cobble together a rough working model of the solar system.
It wasn't particularly accurate or anything, but it looked good.
The planets were whizzing around in reasonably good simulations of their orbits, and you could watch the movement of the whole piece of virtual cosmological clockwork from any point within the system - very roughly.
You could watch from Earth, you could watch from Mars, etc. You could watch from the surface of the planet Rupert.
Tricia had been quite impressed with herself, but also very impressed with the computer system she was working on.
Using a computer workstation on Earth the task would probably have taken a year or so of programming.
When she was finished, the Leader came up behind her and watched.
He was very pleased and delighted with what she had achieved.
Quietly he put a book down in front of her.
It was You and Your Planets by Gail Andrews.
Tricia stopped the tape again.
She was definitely feeling very wobbly indeed.
The feeling that she was hallucinating had now receded, but had not left anything any easier or clearer in her head.
She pushed her seat back from the editing desk and wondered what to do.
Years ago she had left the field of astronomical research because she knew, without any doubt whatsoever, that she had met a being from another planet.
At a party.
And she had also known, without any doubt whatsoever, that she would have made herself a laughing stock if she had ever said so.
But how could she study cosmology and not say anything about the single most important thing she knew about it?
She had done the only thing she could do.
She had left.
Now she worked in television and the same thing had happened again.
She had videotape, actual videotape of the most astounding story in the history of, well anything: a forgotten outpost of an alien civilisation marooned on the outermost planet of our own solar system.
She had the story.
She had been there.
She had seen it.
She had the videotape for God's sake.
And if she ever showed it to anybody, she would be a laughing stock.
How could she prove any of this?
It wasn't even worth thinking about.
The whole thing was a nightmare from virtually any angle she cared to look at it from.
Her head was beginning to throb.
She had some aspirin in her bag.
She went out of the little editing suite to the water dispenser down the corridor.
She took the aspirin and drank several cups of water.
The place seemed to be very quiet.
Usually there were more people bustling about the place, or at least some people bustling around the place.
She popped her head round the door of the editing suite next to hers but there was no one there.
She had gone rather overboard keeping people out of her own suite.
I DON'T CARE WHAT IT IS.
GO AWAY.
When she went back in she noticed that the message light on her phone extension was winking, and wondered how long it had been on.
Everybody's been trying to reach you.
Your TV company.
They're desperate to reach you.
You said I was to deny that you were even here.
I didn't know what to do.
She phoned her office.
Big silver job.
Some girl with a bird.
She speaks English and throws rocks at people and wants someone to repair her watch.
Tricia stared at it.
It wasn't a Grebulon ship.
Not that she was suddenly an expert on extraterrestrial craft, but this was a sleek and beautiful silver and white thing about the size of a large ocean - going yacht, which is what it most resembled.
Next to this, the structures of the huge half- dismantled Grebulon ship looked like gun turrets on a battleship.
Gun turrets.
That's what those blank grey buildings had looked like.
And what was odd about them was that by the time she passed them again on her way to reboarding the small Grebulon craft, they had moved.
These things flitted briefly through her head as she ran from the taxi to meet her camera crew.
I don't know.
What can I tell you?
Busk it.
At least, nearly anything.
She turned to look for the girl.
That must be her, with the wild hair and wild eyes.
The girl turned towards her.
And stared.
Chapter 22 Daylight exploded around them.
Hot, heavy sun.
A desert plain stretched out ahead in a haze of heat.
They thundered out into it.
There was no reply.
He looked around in panic and started to slip.
Realising he couldn't hold on any longer he pushed himself sideways as hard as he could and rolled into a ball as he hit the ground, rolling, rolling away from the pounding hooves.
What a day, he thought, as he started furiously coughing dust up out of his lungs.
He hadn't had a day as bad as this since the Earth had been blown up.
He staggered up to his knees, and then up to his feet and started to run away.
He didn't know what from or what to, but running away seemed a prudent move.
He ran straight into Ford Prefect who was standing there surveying the scene.
Arthur coughed up some more dust, and wiped some other dust out of his hair and eyes.
He turned, panting, to look at what Ford was looking at.
It didn't look much like the domain of a King, or the King, or any kind of King.
It looked quite inviting though.
First, the context.
This was a desert world.
The dusty earth was packed hard and had neatly bruised every last bit of Arthur that hadn't already been bruised by the festivities of the previous night.
Some way ahead of them were great cliffs that looked like sandstone, eroded by the wind and what little rain presumably fell in those parts into wild and fantastic shapes, which matched the fantastic shapes of the giant cacti that sprouted here and there from the arid, orange landscape.
For a moment Arthur dared to hope they had unexpectedly arrived in Arizona or New Mexico or maybe South Dakota, but there was plenty of evidence that this was not the case.
The Perfectly Normal Beasts, for a start, still thundering, still pounding.
They swept up in their tens of thousands from the far horizon, disappeared completely for about half a mile, then swept off, thundering and pounding to the distant horizon opposite.
Then there were the spaceships parked in front of the Bar & Grill.
Ah.
The Domain of the King Bar & Grill.
Bit of an anti-climax, thought Arthur to himself.
In fact only one of the spaceships was parked in front of the Domain of the King Bar & Grill.
The other three were in a parking lot by the side of the Bar and Grill.
It was the one in front that caught the eye, though.
Wonderful looking thing.
Wild fins all over it, far, far too much chrome all over the fins and most of the actual bodywork painted in a shocking pink.
It crouched there like an immense brooding insect and looked as if it was at any moment about to jump on something about a mile away.
The Domain of the King Bar & Grill was slap bang in the middle of where the Perfectly Normal Beasts would be charging if they didn't take a minor transdimensional diversion on the way.
It stood on its own, undisturbed.
An ordinary Bar & Grill.
A truckstop diner.
Somewhere in the middle of nowhere.
Quiet.
The Domain of the King.
With a tiny movement.
Ford brought his Dine-O-Charge credit card up out of his pocket.
Arthur noticed that the hand holding it was trembling very slightly.
He flipped his card on the top of the bar and looked around casually.
There was a kind of silence.
There hadn't been a lot of noise before, but there was definitely a kind of silence now.
Even the distant thunder of the Perfectly Normal Beasts carefully avoiding the Domain of the King seemed suddenly a little muted.
He was leaning against the bar at an extravagantly relaxed angle.
There were about three other customers in the place, sitting at tables, nursing beers.
About three.
Some people would say there were exactly three, but it wasn't that kind of a place, not the kind of a place that you felt like being that specific in.
There was some big guy setting up some stuff on the little stage as well.
Old drum kit.
Couple guitars.
Country and Western kind of stuff.
The barman was not moving very swiftly to get in Ford's order.
In fact he wasn't moving at all.
The barman nodded at the big guy setting up on the stage.
Big fat guy, moving slow, balding.
Ford nodded.
He grinned.
Arthur sat at the bar and rested.
He was used to not knowing what was going on.
He felt comfortable with it.
The beer was pretty good and made him a little sleepy which he didn't mind at all.
The bacon rolls were not bacon rolls.
They were Perfectly Normal Beast rolls.
He exchanged a few professional roll-making remarks with the barman and just let Ford get on with whatever Ford wanted to do.
The barman was very surprised.
We have some items to add to it.
He took a deep pull of beer.
Maybe I feel that what the big guy says is right.
Just let it all go.
What does it matter?
Ford just nodded towards the stage.
Couple other guys were on the stage now.
Drums.
Guitar.
Take the ship.
Take it with my blessing.
Be good to her.
He took a pull at his beer again.
But then you think of guys like InfiniDim Enterprises and you think, they are not going to get away with it.
They are going to suffer.
It is my sacred and holy duty to see those guys suffer.
Here, let me put something on the tab for the singer.
I asked for a special request and we agreed.
It's to go on the tab.
Then he shrugged.
Ford named a figure.
The barman fell over amongst the bottles and glasses.
Ford vaulted quickly over the bar to check that he was all right and help him back up to his feet.
He'd cut his finger and his elbow a bit and was feeling a little woozy but was otherwise fine.
The big guy started to sing.
The barman hobbled off with Ford's credit card to get authorisation.
Fie began to wake up.
Ford let Arthur get on with thinking things out for himself while he got out his old edition of the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
I spent so much time looking for it.
All I found was planets that were a bit like it or not at all like it, though it was clearly the right place because of the continents.
The worst version was called NowWhat where I got bitten by some wretched little animal.
That's how they communicated, you know, by biting each other.
Bloody painful.
Then half the time, of course, the Earth isn't even there because it's been blown up by the bloody Vogons.
Ford didn't comment.
Fie was listening to something.
Fie passed the Guide over to Arthur and pointed at the screen.
That's where Random will be going!
Ford motioned Arthur to shout a little less loudly.
Fie was listening.
Arthur was growing impatient.
Fie was a bit surprised to hear it here, right in the middle of wherever the hell this was, certainly not Earth, but then things tended not to surprise him these days as much as formerly.
The singer was quite good, as bar singers went, if you liked that sort of thing, but Arthur was getting fretful.
He glanced at his watch.
This only served to remind him that he didn't have his watch any more.
Random had it, or at least the remains of it.
He seemed to have tears in his eyes, which Arthur found a bit disturbing.
He'd never seen Ford moved by anything other than very, very strong drink.
Probably the dust.
He waited, tapping his fingers irritably, out of time with the music.
The song ended.
I've fixed it so that it happens completely automatically and untraceably.
Ford named a figure again.
Ford screwed his eyes up as he did some calculations in his head.
He picked up his Hitchhiker's Guide and started to type.
Arthur nodded intelligently.
There were times when he wished he understood what on earth Ford was talking about, and other times, like now, when he felt it was probably safer not even to try.
He looked over Ford's shoulder.
Just mention that the rolls were quite good, the beer good and cold, local wildlife nicely eccentric, the bar singer the best in the known universe, and that's about it.
Doesn't need much.
He touched an area on the screen marked ENTER and the message vanished into the Sub-Etha.
The barman was returning with a piece of paper, which seemed to be trembling in his hand.
He pushed it over to Ford with a kind of nervous, reverential twitch.
Beads of sweat were standing on his brow.
Just like that.
Ford scanned the form quickly.
He sucked his teeth.
He signed with a flourish and handed it back to the barman.
Just for doing what he does best.
Standing up and singing in a bar.
And he negotiated it himself.
I think this is a good moment for him.
He tossed a few coins on the bar.
The barman pushed them away.
They stood out in the heat and the dust and looked at the big pink and chrome thing with amazement and admiration.
Or at least.
Ford looked at it with amazement and admiration.
Arthur just looked at it.
He said it again when they climbed inside it.
The seats and quite a lot of the controls were covered in fine fur skin or suede.
Ford shook his head.
Fie engaged the main drive.
It could.
Chapter 23 The news networks don't like this kind of thing.
They regard it as a waste.
An incontrovertible spaceship arrives out of nowhere in the middle of London and it is sensational news of the highest magnitude.
Another completely different one arrives three and a half hours later and somehow it isn't.
A couple of months later they could have made a lot more of it.
The third spacecraft, half an hour after that, the little four berth Hrundi runabout, only made it on to the local news.
Ford and Arthur had come screaming down out of the stratosphere and parked neatly on Portland Place.
It was just after six-thirty in the evening and there were spaces free.
They mingled briefly with the crowd that gathered round to ogle, then said loudly that if no one else was going to call the police they would, and made good their escape.
I suggest we just find a television and something to drink while we watch it.
They checked into a large two-bedroomed suite at the Langham.
Mysteriously, Ford's Dine-O-Charge card, issued on a planet over five thousand light years away, seemed to present the hotel's computer with no problems.
Ford hit the phones straight away while Arthur attempted to locate the television.
Couple of pitchers.
Couple of Chefs Salads.
And as much foie gras as you've got.
I don't care if it's closed this evening.
I don't want to buy a ticket, I just want to buy the zoo.
I don't care if you're busy.
This is room service, I'm in a room and I want some service.
Got a piece of paper?
OK.
Flere's what I want you to do.
All the animals that can be safely returned to the wild, return them.
God, I can't stand all this parallel universe stuff.
It's so bloody confusing.
It seems to be a different Trillian.
It's Tricia McMillan which is what Trillian used to be called before... er...
We might need to buy somewhere like Zaire and maybe some islands.
Madagascar.
Baffin.
Sumatra.
Those kind of places.
We'll need a wide variety of habitats.
Look, I don't see why you're seeing this as a problem.
Learn to delegate.
Hire whoever you want.
Get on to it.
I think you'll find my credit is good.
And blue cheese dressing on the salad.
He put the phone down and went through to Arthur, who was sitting on the edge of his bed watching television.
Random keeps on screaming at Trillian, or Tricia or whoever it is, that she abandoned her and then demanding to go to a good night club.
Tricia's broken down in tears and says she's never even met Random let alone given birth to her.
Then she suddenly started howling about someone called Rupert and said that he had lost his mind or something.
I didn't quite follow that bit, to be honest.
Then Random started throwing stuff and they've cut to a commercial break while they try and sort it all out.
Oh They've just cut back to the studio!
A rather shaken anchorman appeared on the screen and apologised to viewers for the disruption of the previous item.
Fie said he didn't have any very clear news to report, only that the mysterious girl, who called herself Random Frequent Flyer Dent had left the studio to, er, rest.
Tricia McMillan would be, he hoped, back tomorrow.
Meanwhile, fresh reports of UFO activity were coming in...
Ford leaped up off the bed, grabbed the nearest phone and jabbed at a number.
You want to own the hotel?
It's yours if you can find out for me in five minutes which clubs Tricia McMillan belongs to.
Chapter 24 Away in the inky depths of space invisible movements were being made.
Invisible to any of the inhabitants of the strange and temperamental Plural zone at the focus of which lay the infinitely multitudinous possibilities of the planet called Earth, but not inconsequential to them.
At the very edge of the solar system, hunkered down on a green leatherette sofa, staring fretfully at a range of TV and computer screens sat a very worried Grebulon leader.
He was fiddling with stuff.
Fiddling with his book on astrology.
Fiddling with the console of his computer.
Fiddling with the displays being fed through to him constantly from all of the Grebulons monitoring devices, all of them focused on the planet Earth.
He was distressed.
Their mission was to monitor.
But to monitor secretly.
He was a bit fed up with his mission, to be honest.
He was fairly certain that his mission must have been to do more than sit around watching TV for years on end.
They certainly had a lot of other equipment with them that must have had some purpose if only they hadn't accidentally lost all trace of their purpose.
He needed a sense of purpose in life, which was why he had turned to astrology to fill the yawning gulf that existed in the middle of his mind and soul.
That would tell him something, surely.
Well, it was telling him something.
It was telling him, as far as he could make out, that he was about to have a very bad month, that things were going to go from bad to worse if he didn't get a grip on things and start making some positive moves and thinking things out for himself.
It was true.
It was very clear from his star chart which he had worked out using his astrology book and the computer program which that nice Tricia McMillan had designed for him to re-triangulate all the appropriate astronomical data.
Earth-based astrology had to be entirely recalculated to yield results that were meaningful to the Grebulons here on the tenth planet out on the frozen edges of the solar system.
The recalculations showed absolutely clearly and unambiguously that he was going to have a very bad month indeed, starting with today.
Because today Earth was starting to rise into Capricorn, and that, for the Grebulon leader, who showed all the character signs of being a classic Taurus, was very bad indeed.
Now was the time, his horoscope said, for taking positive actions, making tough decisions, seeing what needed to be done and doing it.
This was all very difficult for him, but he knew that nobody ever said that doing tough stuff wasn't tough.
The computer was already tracking and predicting the second-by-second location of the planet Earth.
He ordered the great grey turrets to swivel.
Because all of the Grebulon surveillance equipment was focused on the planet Earth, it failed to spot that there was now another source of data in the solar system.
Its chances of spotting this other source of data - a massive yellow constructor ship - accidentally were practically nil.
It was as far from the sun as Rupert was, but almost diametrically opposite, almost hidden by the sun.
Almost.
The massive yellow constructor ship wanted to be able to monitor events on Planet Ten without being spotted itself.
It had managed this very successfully.
There were all sorts of other ways in which this ship was diametrically opposite to the Grebulons.
Its leader, its Captain, had a very clear idea of what his purpose was.
It was a very simple and plain one and he had been pursuing it in his simple, plain way for a considerable period of time now.
Anyone who knew of his purpose might have said that it was a pointless and ugly one, that it wasn't the sort of purpose that enhanced a life, put a spring in a person's step, made birds sing and flowers bloom.
Rather the reverse in fact.
Absolutely the reverse.
It wasn't his job to worry about that, though.
It was his job to do his job, which was to do his job.
If that led to a certain narrowness of vision and circularity of thought then it wasn't his job to worry about such things.
Any such things that came his way were referred to others who had, in turn, other people to refer such things to.
Many, many light years from here, indeed from anywhere, lies the grim and long abandoned planet, Vogsphere.
Somewhere on a fetid, fog-bound mud bank on this planet there stands, surrounded by the dirty, broken and empty carapaces of the last few jeweled scuttling crabs, a small stone monument which marks the place, where it is thought, the species Vogon Vogonblurtus first arose.
Deep in the bowels of his unsightly yellow ship, the Vogon Captain grunted as he reached for a slightly faded and dog-eared piece of paper that lay in front of him.
A demolition order.
If you were to unravel exactly where the Captain's job, which was to do his job which was to do his job, actually began, then it all came down at last to this piece of paper that had been issued to him by his immediate superior long ago.
The piece of paper had an instruction on it, and his purpose was to carry out that instruction and put a little tick mark in the adjacent box when he had carried it out.
He had carried out the instruction once before, but a number of troublesome circumstances had prevented him from being able to put the tick in the little box.
One of the troublesome circumstances was the Plural nature of this Galactic sector, where the possible continually interfered with the probable.
Simple demolition didn't get you any further than pushing down a bubble under a badly hung strip of wallpaper.
Anything you demolished kept on popping up again.
That would soon be taken care of.
Another was a small bunch of people who continually refused to be where they were supposed to be when they were supposed to be there.
That, also, would soon be taken care of.
The third was an irritating and anarchic little device called the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
That was now well and truly taken care of and, in fact, through the phenomenal power of temporal reverse engineering, it was now itself the agency through which everything else would be taken care of.
The Captain had merely come to watch the final act of this drama.
He himself did not have to lift a finger.
The shadowy shape of a bird spread its wings and rose into the air near him.
Darkness engulfed the bridge.
Dim lights danced briefly in the black eyes of the bird as, deep in its instructional address space, bracket after bracket was finally closing, if clauses were finally ending, repeat loops halting, recursive functions calling themselves for the last few times.
A brilliant vision lit up in the darkness, a watery blue and green vision, a tube flowing through the air, shaped like a chopped up string of sausages.
With a flatulent noise of satisfaction, the Vogon Captain sat back to watch.
The taxi lurched to a halt, and Ford and Arthur jumped out.
They had stopped at quite a number of cash-dispensers on the way, and Ford chucked a fistful of money through the window at the driver.
The entrance to the club was dark, smart and severe.
Only the smallest little plaque bore its name.
Members knew where it was, and if you weren't a member then knowing where it was wasn't any help to you.
Ford Prefect was not a member of Stavro's though he had once been to Stavro's other club in New York.
Fie had a very simple method of dealing with establishments of which he was not a member.
Fie bounded down the dark glossy stairs, feeling very froody in his new shoes.
They were suede and they were blue, and he was very pleased that in spite of everything else going on he had been sharp- eyed enough to spot them in a shop window from the back of a speeding taxi.
A thin, ill-looking man wearing something baggy and Italian was walking up the stairs past them, lighting a cigarette, and had stopped, suddenly.
He looked straight at Arthur, then seemed to become a little confused.
He started on up the stairs again, but almost immediately turned round once more, even more puzzled.
He stared at Arthur.
His mouth moved weakly.
Then he put his hand to his forehead.
Fie shook his head and turned away again, and went up towards the men's room.
Fie hurried on downstairs, with Arthur following nervously in his wake.
The encounter had shaken him badly and he didn't know why.
Fie didn't like places like this.
For all of the dreams of Earth and home he had had for years, he now badly missed his hut on Lamuella with his knives and his sandwiches.
Fie even missed Old Thrashbarg.
It was the most astounding effect.
His name was being shouted in stereo.
He twisted to look one way.
Up the stairs behind him he saw Trillian hurrying down towards him in her wonderfully rumpled RymplonTM.
She was looking suddenly aghast.
He twisted the other way to see what she was looking suddenly aghast at.
At the bottom of the stairs was Trillian, wearing...
No - this was Tricia.
Tricia that he had just seen, hysterical with confusion, on television.
And behind her was Random, looking more wild-eyed than ever.
Behind her in the recesses of the smart, dimly lit club, the other clientele of the evening formed a frozen tableau, staring anxiously up at the confrontation on the stairs.
For a few seconds everyone stood stock still.
Only the music from behind the bar didn't know to stop throbbing.
It was in the ship she stole from me.
It's quite dangerous in fact.
Just don't move for a moment.
The hand holding the gun was trembling fiercely.
Her other hand delved into her pocket and pulled out the remains of Arthur's watch.
She shook it at them.
She flung the watch violently aside, and it smashed into the glasses behind the bar, scattering its innards.
Everyone was very quiet for a moment or two longer.
We must leave.
She had both hands on the gun now, and both were shaking.
There was no one in particular she was pointing it at.
She was just pointing it at the world in general.
It was extremely dangerous.
At least, I thought it was going to be.
I arrived and the war had suddenly ceased to happen.
There was a time anomaly and... listen!
Please listen!
A reconnaissance battleship had failed to turn up, the rest of the fleet was scattered in some farcical disarray.
We none of us have one.
Hardly anybody has one any more.
The missing ship I was just talking about.
The people of that ship don't have a home.
They don't know where they are from.
They don't even have any memory of who they are or what they are for.
They are very lost and very confused and very frightened.
They are here in this solar system, and they are about to do something very... misGuided because they are so lost and confused.
We... must... leave... now.
I can't tell you where there is to go to.
Perhaps there isn't anywhere.
But here is not the place to be.
Please.
One more time.
Random was wavering in panic and confusion.
Don't ask me to explain just now, but I am safe, so you are safe.
He was feeling very tranquil.
His life was charmed and none of this seemed real.
Slowly, gradually, Random began to relax, and to let the gun down, inch by inch.
Two things happened simultaneously.
The door to the men's room at the top of the stairs opened, and the man who had accosted Arthur came out, sniffing.
Startled at the sudden movement, Random lifted the gun again just as a man standing behind her made a grab for it.
Arthur threw himself forward.
There was a deafening explosion.
He fell awkwardly as Trillian threw herself down over him.
The noise died away.
Arthur looked up to see the man at the top of the stairs gazing down at him with a look of utter stupefaction.
Then slowly, horribly, he fell apart.
Random threw the gun down and fell to her knees, sobbing.
Tricia went to her.
Trillian went to her.
Arthur sat on the stairs with his head between his hands and had not the faintest idea what to do.
Ford was sitting on the stair beneath him.
He picked something up, looked at it with interest, and passed it up to Arthur.
Arthur took it.
It was the book of matches which the dead man had dropped.
It had the name of the club on it.
It had the name of the proprietor of the club on it.
It looked like this: STAVRO MUELLER BETA He stared at it for some time as things began slowly to reassemble themselves in his mind.
He wondered what he should do, but he only wondered it idly.
Around him people were beginning to rush and shout a lot, but it was suddenly very clear to him that there was nothing to be done, not now or ever.
Through the new strangeness of noise and light he could just make out the shape of Ford Prefect sitting back and laughing wildly.
A tremendous feeling of peace came over him.
He knew that at last, for once and for ever, it was now all, finally, over.
In the darkness of the bridge at the heart of the Vogon ship, Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz sat alone.
Lights flared briefly across the external vision screens that lined one wall.
In the air above him the discontinuities in the blue and green watery sausage shape resolved themselves.
Options collapsed, possibilities folded into each other, and the whole at last resolved itself out of existence.
A very deep darkness descended.
The Vogon captain sat immersed in it for a few seconds.
There was no response.
The bird, too, had crumpled out of all possibility.
The Vogon turned on the light himself.
He picked up the piece of paper again and placed a little tick in the little box.
Well, that was done.
His ship slunk off into the inky void.
In spite of having taken what he regarded as an extremely positive piece of action, the Grebulon Leader ended up having a very bad month after all.
It was pretty much the same as all the previous months except that there was now nothing on the television any more.
He put on a little light music instead.
Douglas Adams has written for radio, television, and theater and has worked as a hospital reporter, barn builder, chicken-shed cleaner, bodyguard, radio producer, and script editor.
His worldwide book sales have reached 14 million copies, including his novels The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy; The Restaurant at the End of the Universe; Life, the Universe and Everything; So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish; Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency; The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul; and his recent addition to the hitchhiker's Guides, Mostly Harmless.
In 1989 he spent a year searching the world for rare and endangered species, which resulted in the nonfiction book.
Last Chance to See.
Born in Cambridge, England, in 1952, Douglas Adams now divides his time between homes in London and France.
1 President: full title President of the Imperial Galactic Government.
The term Imperial is kept though it is now an anachronism.
The hereditary Emperor is nearly dead and has been so for many centuries.
In the last moments of his dying coma he was locked in a statis field which keeps him in a state of perpetual unchangingness.
All his heirs are now long dead, and this means that without any drastic political upheaval, power has simply and effectively moved a rung or two down the ladder, and is now seen to be vested in a body which used to act simply as advisers to the Emperor - an elected Governmental assembly headed by a President elected by that assembly.
In fact it vests in no such place.
The President in particular is very much a figurehead - he wields no real power whatsoever.
He is apparently chosen by the government, but the qualities he is required to display are not those of leadership but those of finely judged outrage.
For this reason the President is always a controversial choice, always an infuriating but fascinating character.
His job is not to wield power but to draw attention away from it.
On those criteria Zaphod Beeblebrox is one of the most successful Presidents the Galaxy has ever had - he has already spent two of his ten Presidential years in prison for fraud.
Very very few people realize that the President and the Government have virtually no power at all, and of these very few people only six know whence ultimate political power is wielded.
Most of the others secretly believe that the ultimate decision-making process is handled by a computer.
They couldn't be more wrong.
2 Ford Prefect's original name is only pronuncible in an obscure Betelgeusian dialect, now virtually extinct since the Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster of Gal./Sid./Year 03758 which wiped out all the old Praxibetel communities on Betelgeuse Seven.
Ford's father was the only man on the entire planet to survive the Great Collapsing FI rung disaster, by an extraordinary coincidence that he was never able satisfactorily to explain.
The whole episode is shrouded in deep mystery: in fact no one ever knew what a Flrung was nor why it had chosen to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven particularly.
Ford's father, magnanimously waving aside the clouds of suspicion that had inevitably settled around him, came to live on Betelgeuse Five where he both fathered and uncled Ford; in memory of his now dead race he christened him in the ancient Praxibetel tongue.
Because Ford never learned to say his original name, his father eventually died of shame, which is still a terminal disease in some parts of the Galaxy.
4 A jumbled mass.
5 A cleric ranking below a bishop.
6 See Life, the Universe and Everything, Chapter 18